This free e-book has been downloaded from www.holybooks.com: 
http://www.holybooks.com/the-gay-science-friedrich-nietzsche/
CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE 
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY 
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
The Cay Science 

CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE 
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY 
Series editor 
KARL AMERIKS 
Professor of Philosophy at the University of No tre Dame 
DESMOND M. CLARKE 
Professor of Philosophy at University College Cork 
The main objective of Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy is 
to expand the range, variety and quality of texts in the history of 
philosophy which are available in English. The series includes texts by 
familiar names (such as Descartes and Kant) and also by less well­
known authors. Wherever possible, texts are published in complete and 
unabridged form, and translations are specially commissioned for the 
series. Each volume contains a critical introduction together with a 
guide to further reading and any necessary glossaries and textual 
apparatus. The volumes are designed for student use at undergraduate 
and postgraduate level and will be of interest not only to students of 
philosophy, but also to a wider audience of readers in the history of 
science, the history of theology and the his tory of ideas. 
Fora list of tit les pub lis hed in the series, please see end of book. 

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
The Cay Science 
With a Prelude in German Rhymes 
and an Appendix of Songs 
EDITED BY 
BERNARD WILLIAMS 
All Souls College, Oxford 
TRANSLA TED BY 
JOSEFINE NAUCKHOFF 
Wake Forest University 
POEMS TRANSLATED BY 
ADRIAN DEL CARO 
University o/Colorado at Boulder 
.... ~ ..... CAMBRIDGE 
::: UNIVERSITY PRESS 

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, Sao Paulo, Delhi 
Cambridge University Press 
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge c B 2 8R u, UK 
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York 
www.cambridge.org 
Information on this tide: www.cambridge.org/9780521636452 
© Cambridge University Press 2001 
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception 
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, 
no reproduction of any part may take place without 
the written permission of Cambridge University Press. 
First published 2001 
Seventh printing 2008 
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge 
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library 
Library ofCongress cataloguing in publication data 
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 1844-1900. 
[Friihliche Wissenschaft. English] 
The gay science: with a prelude in German rhymes and an appendix of songs I Friedrich Nietzsche; 
edited by Bernard Williams; translated by Josefine Nauckhoff; poems translated by Adrian Del Caro. 
p. cm. - (Cambridge texts in the history of philosophy) 
lncludes bibliographical references (p. ) and index. 
ISBN o 521 631599(hardback)-ISBN o 52163645o(paperback) 
r. Philosophy. I. Williams, Bernard Arthur Owen. 11. Nauckhoff,Josefine. 
III. Del Caro, Adrian, 1952- . IV. Tide. v. Series. 
B3313.F72 ES 2001 
193-dc21 2001025408 
ISBN 978-0-521-63 I 59-4 hardback 
ISBN 978-0-521-63645-2 paperback 
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy ofURLs 
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not 
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, 
accurate or appropriate. 

lntroduction 
Chronology 
Further reading 
Note on the text 
The Gay Science 
Contents 
'Joke, Cunning and Revenge': Prelude in German Rhymes 
BookOne 
BookTwo 
Book Three 
Book Four: StJanuarius 
Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei 
Index 
V 
page vii 
XXlll 
XXVl 
XXVll 
I 
II 
27 
69 
109 
157 
199 
249 

Introduction 
The Cay Science is a remarkable book, both in itself and as offering a 
way into same of Nietzsche's most important ideas. The history of its 
publication is rather complex, and it throws same light on the develop­
ment of his thought and of his methods as a writer. He published the 
first edition of it in 1882. In that version, it consisted of only four books, 
and had no Preface, though it did have the 'Prelude in Rhymes'. A 
second edition appeared in 1887, which added a fifth book, the Preface, 
and an Appendix of further poems. This is the work as we now know it, 
and which is translated here. 
Between the two editions of The Cay Science, Nietzsche wrote two of 
his best-known works, Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883-5) and Beyond 
Cood and Evi/ (1886); the last section of Book Four of The Cay Science 
(342)1 is indeed virtually the same as the first section of Zarathustra. So 
the complete Cay Science brackets these two books, which are different 
from it and from each other. (Zarathustra, which is a peculiar literary 
experiment in a rhetoric drawn from the Bible, was once ane of 
Nietzsche's most popular works, but it has worn less well than the 
others.) Book Five of The Cay Science anticipates, in turn, same of the 
themes of another famous book which was to follow in 1887, On the 
Cenealogy of Morality, which is again different in tone, sustaining a 
more continuous theoretical argument. 
The Cay Science is a prime example of what is aften called Nietzsche's 
'aphoristic' style. It consists of a sequence of sections which are not 
obviously tied to ane another except, sametimes, in general content, and 
1 References to The Cay Science, and to other works by Nietzsche, are to numbered sections. 
Vll 

lntroduction 
which do not offer a connected argument. The second half of Book 
Three, in particular, consists of many very short paragraphs of this 
kind. Elsewhere, however, there are longer passages, and in faet the 
arrangement of the shorter sections is not as fortuitous as it may look. It 
is often designed to gather thoughts which will, so to speak, circle in on 
some central theme or problem. 
In his earlier works, Nietzsche had moved gradually towards this 
style. He had been appointed in 1869 as a professor of classical philology 
at the University of Basle, at the extraordinarily early age of twenty­
four. He served in this position for ten years, resigning in 1879 because 
of the ill health which was to persist throughout his lif e. (The last letter 
he wrote, when in 1889 he broke down into insanity and a silence which 
lasted until his death in 1900, was to his distinguished colleague at 
Basle, Jacob Burckhardt, in which he said that he would rather have 
been a Swiss professor than God, but he had not dared to push egoism 
so far.) In his years at Basle he published first The Birth of Tragedy, 
which has the form, if not the content or the tone, of a treatise, and a set 
of four long essays collected as Untimely Meditations. In 1878-9 he 
brought out two books forming Human, All Too Human, followed in 
1880 by a further part called 'The Wanderer and his Shadow', and in 
these writings he moved from continuous exposition and argument to 
setting out a sequence of thoughts which were not necessarily tied 
discursively to their neighbours, a style that allowed him to approach a 
question from many different directions. In Daybreak, which came out 
in 1881, the style is fully developed. As late as 25 January 1882 he still 
referred to what were to be the first books of The Cay Science as a 
continuation of Daybreak; by June they had acquired their separate tide. 
When he made that decision, he sensed that Book Four, which is 
called 'Sanctus Januarius' and invokes the spirit of the New Year, might 
be found obscure, and he was anxious about whether his correspondent, 
Peter Gast, would understand it. He knew that this was not just a set of 
penetrating, perhaps rather cynical, aperrus. 'Aphorism', the standard 
term which I have already mentioned, implies too strongly that each is 
supposed to be a squib, or a compact expression of a truth (often in the 
form of an exaggerated falsehood) in the style of the French writers La 
Rochefoucault and Chamfort, whom Nietzsche indeed admired, but 
whom he did not simply follow in giving a self-conscious expose of 
some human failing, foible or piece of self-deception. There is a certain 
Vlll 

lntroduction 
amount of that, particularly in the earlier books, but he was very aware 
of the risk that such aphorisms run of sliding from the daring through 
the knowing to the self-satisfied (it is not merely cynicism that he 
intends when he says in 379 that 'we are artists of contempt'). His 
ambitions are deeper; the effect is meant to be cumulative, and its aim is 
more systematically subversive. A philosopher who had a similar inten­
tion, though in totally different connections, is the later Wittgenstein, 
and Nietzsche might have called the sections of this book, as Wittgen­
stein called the paragraphs of his manuscripts, 'remarks'. 
His remarks cover very various subjects. Many of them touch on what 
may be called moral psychology, and sometimes he does claim to detect 
an egoistic origin of some ethically approved reaction (as he does, for 
example, in the shrewd observation about magnanimity and revenge at 
section 49). The search for the 'shameful origin' of our moral senti­
ments was later to become an important principle of his genealogical 
method. But he is very clear that mere reductionism, the readily cynical 
explanation of all such attitudes in terms of self-interest, is a mistake. 
Partly this is because he does not think that self-interest is an indivi­
dual's basic motive anyway, and this book contains some quite complex, 
if unresolved, reflections on that question, in particular when he 
considers whether the virtues have a value for the individual who 
possesses them, or for the group. But, more broadly, Nietzsche thinks 
that the reductive spirit itself can be in error, a form of vulgarity (3), 
and that the 'realists' who congratulate themselves on having the 
measure of human unreason and self-deception are usually themselves 
in the grip of some ancient fantasy (57). 
Above all, it is simply not enough, in Nietzsche's view, to 'unmask' 
some supposedly honourable sentiment or opinion and leave it at that. 
'Only as creators can we destroy', he very significantly says (58). What 
things are called is fundamentally important, but a conventional set of 
names - as we may say, an interpretation - can be replaced only by 
another, more powerful, interpretation. When we say that one inter­
pretation is more powerful than another, it is vitally important what 
counts as 'power'. It is often said that Nietzsche explains everything in 
terms of power. This says something about the way in which he saw 
these problems, but it is wrong if it is supposed to state his solution to 
it. The point is very clear in On the Genealogy of Morality. There he 
tells a story of how a certain outlook or interpretation, embodying 
IX 

lntroduction 
metaphysical illusions, came into existence as a psychological compensa­
tion for the weakness of people who were powerless, and how this 
oudook triumphed over the conventionally strong and their view of the 
world. The question must be, how could this have come about? What 
was the source of this new power? There had to be something to this new 
way of describing the world which accounted in naturalistic terms for its 
triumph, and Nietzsche fully accepts this, even if he does not have a 
very rich vocabulary of social explanation in which he can discuss what 
it might be. 'Let us ... not forget', he goes on in section 58 of The Cay 
Science, 'that in the long run it is enough to create new names and 
valuations and appearances of truth in order to create new "things" '. 
lndeed, but this immediately raises the question, one to which 
Nietzsche returned in many different connections: what must someone 
do to 'create' new names? 
The words 'The Gay Science' translate the German title 'Die 
Frohliche Wissenschaft'. No one, presumably, is going to be misled by 
the more recent associations of the word 'gay' - it simply means joyful, 
light-hearted, and above all, lacking in solemnity (section 327, on taking 
things seriously, says something about this). 'Science' has its own 
difficulties. The word 'Wissenschaft', unlike the English word 'science' 
in its modem use, does not mean simply the natural and biological 
sciences - they are, more specifically, 'Naturwissenschaft'. It means any 
organized study or body of knowledge, including history, philology, 
criticism and generally what we call 'the humanities', and that is often 
what Nietzsche has in mind when he uses the word in the text (it is 
often translated as 'science', for want of a brief alternative). But in the 
tide itself there is an idea still broader than this. It translates a phrase, 
'gai saber', or, as Nietzsche writes on his tide page, 'gaya scienza', which 
referred to the art of song cultivated by the medieval troubadours of 
Provence, and with that, as he explains in Beyond Good and Evi! (260), it 
invokes an aristocratic culture of courtly love. As he made clear, this 
association comes out in the faet that the hook contains poems. But the 
tide has other implications as well. One - particularly important to 
understanding this hook and Nietzsche more generally - is that, just as 
the troubadours possessed not so much a body of information as an art, 
so Nietzsche's 'gay science' does not in the first place consist of a 
doctrine, a theory or body of knowledge. While it involves and 
encourages hard and rigorous thought, and to this extent the standard 
X 

lntroduction 
implications of 'Wissenschaft' are in place, 1t 1s meant to convey a 
certain spirit, one that in relation to understanding and criticism could 
defy the 'spirit of gravity' as lightly as the troubadours, supposedly, 
celebrated their loves. This is why the original publisher could an­
nounce at the beginning of the hook that it brought to a conclusion a 
series of Nietzsche's writings (including Human, All Too Human and 
Daybreak) which shared the aim of setting out 'a new image and ideal of 
the free spirit'. 
He said that it was the most personal of his books, meaning that in 
part it was explicitly about his own life: some of it is like a diary. It is not 
irrelevant that the 'gai saber' belonged to the south of Europe, to the 
Mediterranean. Nietzsche spent much of his time in the last years of his 
working life in Italy (in places such as those he praises in sections 281 
and 291), and he was very conscious of the contrast between overcast 
German eamestness and Southem sun and freedom, an idea which had 
a long literary history and had been most famously expressed, perhaps, 
in Goethe's Italian Journey. That is a recurrent contrast in The Cay 
Science, but, as so often with Nietzsche, it is not one contrast, and his 
reflections on the German spirit in philosophy and religion are specially 
nuanced in this hook, for instance in his discussion (357) of 'What is 
German?' 
Nietzsche's general reflections, here as elsewhere, have some recur­
rent weaknesses. There are cranky reflections on diet and climate. His 
opinions about women and sex, even if they include (as at 71) one or 
two shrewd and compassionate insights into the conventions of his time, 
are often shallow and sometimes embarrassing; they were, biographi­
cally, the produet of an experience which had been drastically limited 
and disappointing. However, what is most significant for his thought as 
a whole is the faet that his resources for thinking about modem society 
and politics, in particular about the modem state, were very thin. The 
point is not that he was opposed to a free society, equal rights, and other 
typically modem aspirations (though he certainly was, as section 377, 
for instance, makes clear). In faet, Nietzsche has by no means been a 
hero exclusively of the political Right, and many radical, socialist and 
even feminist groups in the last century found support in his writings. 2 
2 A very interesting study in this connection is Steven E. Ascheim, The Nietzsche Legacy in 
Gennany 1890- 1990 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). A helpful discussion of 
Nietzsche's political thought is Bruce Detwiler, Nietzsche and the Politics of Aristocratic Radicalism 
Xl 

Introduction 
This was possible just because the deeply radical spirit of his work was 
combined with a lack of effective political and social ideas, leaving a 
blank on which many diff erent aspirations could be projected. His 
clearly aristocratic sympathies are, in political connections, not so much 
reactionary as archaic, and while he has many illuminating things to say 
about the religious and cultural history of Europe, his conception of 
social relations owes more to his understanding of the ancient world 
than to a grasp of modernity. The idea of nihilism which is so important 
in his later works is undeniably relevant to modem conditions, but his 
discussions of such subjects as 'corruption' (in section 23 of this book) 
borrow a lot from the rhetoric of the Roman Empire and the disposition 
of its writers to praise the largely imaginary virtues of the vanished 
Republic. 
The Cay Science marks a decisive step beyond the books that came 
before it because it introduces two of what were to become Nietzsche's 
best-known themes, the Death of God and the Eternal Recurrence. The 
idea that God is dead occurs first at rn8, in association with the image of 
the Buddha's shadow, still to be seen in a cave for centuries after his 
death. This is followed at 125 by the haunting story of a madman with a 
lantern in the bright morning, looking for God. He is met by ridicule, 
and he concludes that he has 'come too early', that the news of God's 
death has not yet reached humanity, even though they have killed him 
themselves. This idea recurs in more literal terms in 343, the first 
section of Book Five (published, we may recall, five years later). The 
death of God is identified there as the faet that 'the belief in . . . God 
has become unbelievable': this, 'the greatest recent event', is beginning 
to cast its shadow across Europe. Once this event is fully recognized, it 
will have incalculable consequences, in particular for European morality. 
Some of these consequences will be melancholy, and indeed elsewhere 
Nietzsche struggles with the question of what aet of creation, by whom, 
might overcome the emptiness left by the collapse of traditional 
illusions. But here the news brings, at least in the short term, only joy, a 
sense of daybreak and freedom, the promise of an open sea: 'maybe 
there has never been such an "open sea" '. 
(University of Chicago Press, 1990). Mark Warren, in Nietzsche and Political Thought (Boston: 
MIT Press, 1988), well brings out the limitations of Nietzsche's social ideas, but is over­
optimistic in thinking that if his philosophy were true to itself, it would offer a basis for 
liberalism. 
Xll 

lntroduction 
Nietzsche continued to think that the death of God would have vast 
and catastrophic consequences. But on the account that he himself gave 
of Christian belief and its origins (in this hook and in Beyond Good and 
Evi/, but above all in On the Genealogy of Morality), should he really 
have thought this? He believed that the faith in the Christian God, and 
more generally in a reassuring metaphysical structure of the world, was 
a projection of fear and resentment, representing a victory of the weak 
over the strong. That metaphysical belief has <lied; it has been 
destroyed, as Nietzsche often points out, by itself, by the belief in 
truthfulness - and we shall come back to that - which was itself part of 
the metaphysical faith. But how much difference should he expect its 
death to make? He shares with another nineteenth-century subverter, 
Marx (with whom he shares little else), the idea that religious belief is a 
consequence, an expression of social and psychological forces. If those 
forces remain, and the Christian expression of them collapses, then 
surely other expressions will take its place. If need secretes thought, and 
the need remains, then it will secrete new thoughts. 
Indeed, Nietzsche does think this: he thinks that liberalism, socialism, 
Utilitarianism and so on are just secularized expressions of those same 
forces. But he thinks that they are too manifestly close to the original, 
and that our growing understanding that the world has no metaphysical 
structure whatsoever must discredit them as well. The death of God is 
the death of those gods, too. He has a particular contempt for benign 
freethinkers who hope to keep all the ethical content of Christianity 
without its theology: George Eliot is the unlucky target when the point 
is spelled out very clearly in The Twilight of the Idols (the section called 
'Expeditions of an Untimely Man'). But that is not the most important 
point. Even if the content of our morality changes noticeably, as for 
instance attitudes towards sex have done in recent times, much more 
basic and structural elements of it, its humanitarianism and its professed 
belief in equal respect for everyone, are in Nietzsche's view too bound 
up with the mechanisms that generated Christianity, and will inevitably 
go the same way that it has gone. It is too soon, surely, to say that he was 
wrong. 
For Nietzsche himself there was another dimension as well, one 
immediately connected with his own values. He saw the unravelling of 
Christianity as part of the phenomenon that he called European 
nihilism, the loss of any sense of depth or significance to life. The world 
xm 

lntroduction 
might conceivably avoid destruction and overt hatred by organizing a 
pleasantly undemanding and unreflective way of life, a dazed but 
adequately efficient consumerism. Nietzsche probably did not think that 
such a society could survive in the long run, but in any case he could 
not reconcile himself to such a prospect or regard it as anything but 
loathsome. Contempt was one of his readier emotions, and nothing 
elicited it more than what he sometimes calls 'the last man', the 
contented, unadventurous, philistine produet of such a culture. This 
hook, like all his others, makes it clear that any life worth living must 
involve daring, individuality and creative bloody-mindedness. This is 
indeed expressed in the 'gaiety' of its tide. Gaiety can encompass 
contentment, as it does on New Year's Day at the beginning of Book 
Four, but when that is so, it is a particular achievement and a piece of 
good luck. Gaiety is not itself contentment, and while it rejects 
solemnity and the spirit of gravity, it does so precisely because it is the 
only way of taking life seriously. 
Nietzsche has been thought by some people to have had a brutal and 
ruthless attitude to the world; sometimes, perhaps, he wished that he 
had. But in faet, one personal feature which, together with his illness 
and his loneliness, contributed to his outlook was a hyper-sensitivity to 
suffering. It was linked to a total refusal to forget, not only the existence 
of suffering, but the faet that suffering was necessary to everything that 
he and anyone else valued. 'All good things come from bad things' is one 
of his fundamental tenets: it signals his rejection of what he calls 'the 
fundamental belief of the metaphysicians, the belief in the opposition of 
values' (Beyond Good and Evi!, 2). This is, for him, a principle of 
interpretation, but it presents itself in the first instance simply as a 
faet, which he thought no honest understanding of the world could 
evade. If a sense of the world's achievements and glories - art, self­
understanding, nobility of character - cannot in common honesty be 
separated from the knowledge of the horrors that have been involved in 
bringing these things about, then there is a question that cannot, 
Nietzsche supposed, simply be ignored: whether it has all been worth it. 
Thinkers in the past have supposed that the question could be 
answered, and answered positively. Leibniz, with his famous doctrine 
that this is the hest of all possible worlds, believed in a cosmic cost­
benefit analysis which would vindicate God's mysterious management. 
Hegel had told a progressive metaphysical story of the historical 
XIV 

Introduction 
development of freedom and reason, whieh represented the horrors as 
all dialeetieally neeessary to the eventual outeome, so that we could be 
sure that none of them was meaningless. Neither of these fantasies, 
Nietzsehe reasonably thought, eould be taken seriously in the late 19th 
eentury. Nor, he eame to think, eould one take altogether seriously 
someone who answered the same question, but in the negative. In his 
earlier years he had been very impressed, as Wagner was, by the 
philosophy of Sehopenhauer, and his ref erenees to Sehopenhauer in this 
book are mostly respeetful (more so than those to Wagner), but he eame 
to be very seeptieal about Sehopenhauer's so-ealled pessimism, whieh 
had been expressed in the judgement (for instanee) that the world's 
'non-existenee would be preferable to its existenee'. 3 'We take eare not 
to say that the world is worth less', he says at 346: 
The whole attitude of man ... as judge of the world who finally 
places existence itself on his scales and finds it too light - the 
monstrous stupidity of this attitude has finally dawned on us and 
we are sick of it. 
Nietzsehe reeognizes that his own Birth of Tragedy had been full of 
the Schopenhauerian spirit. Taken in that spirit, the question of 'the 
value of life', he eame to think, had no answer and was indeed not a 
question. Yet it did not simply go away, beeause there remained what 
seemed to Nietzsehe, at least, to be a faet, that anyone who really 
understood and held in his mind the horrors of the world would be 
erushed or ehoked by them. That faet left, if not a question to be 
answered, at least a problem to be overeome. Nietzsche presents the 
problem, and his way of overcoming it, in the form of the thought­
experiment of the Eternal Recurrenee, which appears for the first time 
in The Cay Science.4 In the startling words of 341, what would you 
think if a <lemon told you that everything in life would recur over and 
over again eternally? How would you answer the question 'Do you want 
this again and innumerable times again?'? This question, Nietzsche 
says, 'would lie on your actions as the heaviest weight'. It tests your 
ability not to be overcome by the world's horror and meaninglessness. 
3 The World as Will and Representation, trans. E. F. J. Payne (2 vols., New York: Dover, 1969), vol. 
n, chapter 46, p. 576 
4 The phrase 'eternal recurrence' occurs first at sec 285, but in a more limited connection, of 
recognizing that there is no perpetual peace, but only (as the pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus 
taught) a cycle of war and peace. 
XV 

/ntroduction 
There is no belief which could 'justify the world': confronted with the 
question of its value, or rather with the replacement for that question, 
which is the prospect of being crushed by the consciousness of what the 
world is like, the only issue is (as Nietzsche also puts it) whether one can 
say 'yes' to it, and the test of that is whether seriously and in the fullest 
consciousness you could will that the course of everything should 
happen over and over again, including not just its pain and cruelty and 
humiliation, but also its triviality, emptiness and ugliness, the last man 
and everything that goes with him. 
This is an entirely hypothetical question, a thought-experiment. It is 
nota matter, as I read him, ofNietzsche's believing in a theory of eternal 
recurrence. The idea (which does not occur in Beyond Good and Evi! or 
The Genealogy of Morality) appears in Zarathustra in a form similar to 
that of The Cay Science, and Nietzsche mentions its importance in The 
Twilight of the Idols and in Ecce Homo (the intellectual autobiography 
that he wrote on the verge of insanity). There are some places in which 
it is treated as a theoretical idea, but they are largely confined to his 
unpublished notes (his Nachlass), some of which, particularly from his 
last years, were published in The Will to Power, which is not a hook by 
Nietzsche at all, but a selection from these notes tendentiously put 
together by his sister. 
But if the idea of the Eternal Recurrence is a thought-experiment, 
how can answering its question lie on our actions 'as the heaviest 
weight'? If it is a mere fantasy, then how can 'willing' the Eternal 
Recurrence cost one anything at all? It seems as simple as saying 'yes'. 
But one has to recall that in facing the question one is supposed to have 
a real and live consciousness of everything that has led to this moment, 
in particular to what we value. We would have to think in vivid detail, if 
we could, of every dreadful happening that has been necessary to create 
Venice, or Newton's science, or whatever one thinks hest of in our 
morality. Then we would have not simply to say 'yes', but to say 'yes' 
and mean it. That does not seem exactly weightless. What perhaps does 
less work in the thought-experiment is the element, which Nietzsche 
certainly thought essential to it, of eternity. If there is anything in this 
test at all, why would willing one recurrence not be enough? If you 
could overcome the 'nausea', as Zarathustra repeatedly puts it, of the 
prospect that the horrors and the last man and all the rest will come 
round again even once, and say 'yes' to it, you would have taken the 
XVI 

lntroduction 
essential step: could willing all those further recurrences cost you very 
much more? 
There is another, very natura!, reaction to the problem, which is 
almost everyone's reaction: to forget ahout it. One can forget that the 
horrors exist, and also, if one has a taste for metaphysical consolations, 
that God is dead. The narrator of Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby 
says of Tom and Daisy that they 'retreated back into their money and 
their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that held them together', and 
that is, roughly speaking, the remedy that the 'last man' finds for 
Nietzsche's problem. David Hume spoke of 'carelessness and inatten­
tion' as the only remedy for sceptical doubts; but that is not the same, 
because Hume thought that sceptical doubts were unreal. Nietzsche 
knew that the considerations we all forget were not unreal, and he held 
obstinately to an idea of truthfulness that would not allow us to falsify 
them. In this hook, he calls on honesty and intellectual conscience at 
319 and (as we shall see) at 344; at 284 he speaks of those who have to 
have an argument against the sceptic inside themselves - 'the great self­
dissatisfied people'. In The Anti-Christ (50 ), at the very end of his active 
life, he wrote: 
Truth has had to be fought for every step of the way, almost 
everything else dear to our hearts, on which our love and our trust 
in life depend, has had to be sacrificed to it. Greatness of soul is 
needed for it, the service of truth is the hardest service. - For what 
does it mean to be honest in intellectual things? That one is stem 
towards one's heart, that one despises 'fine feelings', that one 
makes every Yes and No a question of conscience! 
The value of truthfulness embraces the need to find out the truth, to 
hold on to it, and to tell it - in particular, to oneself. But Nietzsche's 
own dedication to this value, he saw, immediately raised the question of 
what this value is. We have taken it for granted, he thinks, and we have 
seriously misunderstood it: as he says in Beyond Good and Evi! (177), 
'Perhaps nobody yet has been truthful enough about what "truthful­
ness" is.' 
Section 344 of The Cay Science (the second section of Book Five) 
gives one of Nietzsche's most important and illuminating statements of 
this question: 
This unconditional will to truth - what is it? Is it the will not to let 
oneself be deceived? Is it the will not to deceive? For the will to 
xvu 

lntroduction 
truth could be interpreted in this second way, too - if 'I do not 
want to deceive myself is included as a special case under the 
generalization 'I do not want to deceive'. But why not deceive? But 
why not allow oneself to be deceived? 
The reasons for not wanting to be deceived, he goes on to say, are 
prudential; seen in that light, wanting to get things right in our 
intellectual studies and in practical life will be a matter of utility. But 
those considerations cannot possibly sustain an unconditional value for 
truth: much of the time it is more useful to believe falsehoods. Our 
belief in the unconditional will to truth 
must have originated in spite of the faet that the disutility and 
dangerousness of 'the will to truth' or 'truth at any price' is proved 
to it constantly. 'At any price': we understand this well enough 
once we have offered and slaughtered one faith after another on 
this altar! Consequently, 'will to truth' does not mean 'I do not 
want to let myselfbe deceived' but- there is no alternative - 'I will 
not deceive, not even myself'; and with that we stand on moral 
ground . 
. . . you will have gathered what I am getting at, namely, that it is 
still a metaphysicalfaith upon which our faith in science rests - that 
even we knowers of today, we godless anti-metaphysicians, still 
take our fire, too, from the flame lit by the thousand-year-old faith, 
the Christian faith which was also Plato's faith, that God is truth; 
that truth is divine. . . 
The tide of the section is 'In what way we, too, are still pious'. The 
idea is developed further in Book III of On the Genealogy of Morality, 
where the 'ascetic ideal' which has received an unflattering genealogical 
explanation is discovered to lie at the root of the will to truth, which 
powered the need to <liseover that very explanation. But that does not 
overthrow the will to truth: 'I have every respect for the ascetic ideal in 
so far as it is honest!' (III .26). 
The 'unconditional will to truth' does not mean that we want to 
believe any and every truth. It does mean that we want to understand 
who we are, to correct error, to avoid deceiving ourselves, to get beyond 
comfortable falsehood. The value of truthfulness, so understood, cannot 
lie just in its consequences, as Nietzsche repeatedly points out. Earlier 
in this hook (121), he says that various beliefs may be necessary for our 
life, but that does not show them to be true: 'life is not an argument'. 
xvm 

lntroduction 
Already in Human, All Too Human (517) he had noted: 'Fundamental 
lnsight: There is no pre-established harmony between the furthering of 
truth and the well-being of humanity.' Again, in Beyond Good and Evi/ 
( 11) he says that we must understand that there are some judgements 
which 'must be believed to be true, for the sake of preservation of 
creatures like ourselves, though they might, of course, be false judge­
ments for all that'. 
Truth may be not just unhelpful, but destructive. In particular the 
truths of Nietzsche's own philosophy, which discredit the metaphysical 
world, can (as we have seen) destructively lead to nihilism if they come 
to be accepted. In the Nachlass (The Will to Power 5) there is a revealing 
note, which mentions the way in which the idea of truthfulness has 
turned against the morality which fostered it, and ends with the remark: 
This antagonism - not to esteem what we know, and not to be 
allowed any longer to esteem the lies we should like to tel1 ourselves 
- results in a process of dissolution. 
In what ways are we 'not allowed' to esteem these lies? To some degree, 
Nietzsche thought that this was already in his time a historical or social 
necessity: that, at least among thoughtful people, these beliefs simply 
could not stand up much longer or have much life to them. It is a good 
question whether this was right, indeed whether it is right today -
particularly when we recall the secularized, political, forms which are 
now taken, as Nietzsche supposed, by the same illusions. What is 
certainly true is that Nietzsche took it to be an ethical necessity, for 
himself and anyone he was disposed to respect, not to esteem these 
illusions. He did think that there were things which, even for honest 
and retlective people, could rightly compensate in some ways for the 
loss of the illusions; it is in this spirit that he remarks elsewhere in the 
Nachlass (The Will to Power 822) 'We possess art lest we perish of the 
truth.' He does not mean that we possess art in place of the truth; he 
means that we possess art so that we can possess the truth and not 
perish of it. 
There continue to be complex debates about what Nietzsche under­
stood truth to be. Quite certainly, he did not think, in pragmatist spirit, 
that beliefs are true if they serve our interests or welfare: we have 
already seen some of his repeated denials of this idea. A more recently 
fashionable view of him is that he shared, perhaps founded, a kind of 
XIX 

lntroduction 
deconstructive scepticism to the effect that there is no such thing as 
truth, or that truth is what anyone thinks it is, or that it is a boring 
category that we can do without. This is also wrong, and more deeply 
so. As we have seen, Nietzsche did not think that the ideal of truthful­
ness went into retirement when its metaphysical origins were discov­
ered, and he did not suppose, either, that truthfulness could be detached 
from a concern for the truth. Truthfulness as an ideal retains its power, 
and so far from truth being dispensable or malleable, his main question 
is how it can be made bearable. Repeatedly Nietzsche - the 'old 
philologist', as he called himself - reminds us that, quite apart from any 
question about philosophical interpretations, including his own, there 
are facts to be respected. In The Anti-Christ (59) he praises the ancient 
world for having invented 'the incomparable art of reading well, the 
prerequisite for all systematic knowledge', and with that 'the sense for 
facts, the last-developed and most valuable of all the senses'. At the 
beginning of On the Genealogy of Morality, he tells us that 'the English 
psychologists' should not be dismissed as old, cold, boring frogs; rather, 
they are brave animals, 
who have been taught to sacrifice desirability to truth, every truth, 
even a plain, bitter, ugly, foul, unchristian, immoral truth ... Be­
cause there are such truths -
He keenly detects elements in our intellectual structures which we 
mistake for truths. In The Cay Science he stresses the importance of 'a 
law of agreement', which regulates people's thoughts and provides 
intellectual security (76). He stresses the historical, indeed the con­
tinuing, importance of these conceptions, but he does not think that 
they are the truth, or that they are immune to the discovery of truth. 
They are contrasted with the truth, and the question is, what will emerge 
from a battle between them and a growing awareness of the truth: as he 
asks at I rn, 'to what extent can truth stand to be incorporated?' 
In his earliest writings about truth and error, Nietzsche sometimes 
spoke as though he could compare the entire structure of our thought to 
the 'real' nature of things and find our thought defective. It is as though 
the business of using concepts at all falsified a reality which in itself was 
- what? Formless, perhaps, or chaotic, or utterly unstructured. Later, he 
rightly rejected this picture, with its implication that we can somehow 
look round our the edge of our concepts at the world to which we are 
XX 

lntroduction 
applying them and grasp it as entirely unaffected by any descriptions 
(including, we would be forced to admit, the descriptions 'formless', 
'chaotic', and so on). 5 There are passages in The Cay Science where it is 
unclear whether he is still attached to this picture. He discusses fictions, 
the practice of regarding things as equal or identical or mathematically 
structured when they are not so or only approximately so (110, 121). He 
is making the point, certainly, that mathematical representations which 
are off ered by the sciences are in various ways idealizations, and this is 
entirely intelligible. There is greater ambiguity when he suggests that 
nothing is really 'identical' or 'the same'. To take an example: the 
concept 'snake' allows us to classify various individual things as 'the 
same animal', and to recognize one individual thing as 'the same snake'. 
It is trivially true that 'snake' is a human concept, a cultural produet. 
But it is a much murkier proposition that its use somehow falsijies 
reality - that 'in itself' the world does not contain snakes, or indeed 
anything else you might mention. Nietzsche came to see that this idea of 
the world 'in itself' was precisely a relic of the kind of metaphysics that 
he wanted to overcome. As a remark in the N achlass puts it ( The Will to 
Power 567): 'The antithesis of the apparent world and the true world is 
reduced to the antithesis "world" and "nothing" .' 
It is less than clear, and also well worth considering, how far the 
formulations of The Cay Science still commit him to the murky 
metaphysical picture. Some of the same problems affect another idea 
which appears in the hook, and which was to be important in works he 
wrote af ter it, the idea of 'a perspective'. Our interpretative outlook, our 
particular 'take' on the world, is modelled on the analogy of a literal, 
visual, perspective, and this analogy has two implications: that we 
understand that there can be alternative perspectives, and, importantly, 
that these will be alternative perspectives on the same reality. In later 
works, Nietzsche is often less than definite about what is involved in this 
second implication, but he is very clear about the first implication, and 
indeed urges us to combine perspectives, or move between them, which 
shows that we not only know that there are other perspectival views, but 
that we know what some of them are. In The Cay Science, he seems on 
the very edge of stepping into this problem. Section 299, for instance, 
suggests that we can make use of different perspectives. But at 374, 
5 This is well argued by Maudemarie Clark, Nietzsche on Truth and Philosophy (Cambridge 
University Press, 1991). 
XXI 

lntroduction 
where he says 'we cannot reject the possibility that it [the world] 
includes infinite interpretations', the idea of the 'alternatives' seems to 
remain an entirely abstract possibility: 'we cannot look around our 
corner'. 
The 'Greeks were superficial - out of profundity', he says in the 
Preface (and he repeated the remark later, in the epilogue to Nietzsche 
contra Wagner). But the Greeks in their time could straightforwardly 
display a delight in surfaces and appearances which was indeed 
profound. That is not possible for us, after so much history: any such 
attitude for us will be a different and more sophisticated thing, and it 
will represent an achievement. At the very end of the hook, he returns 
to the gaiety of the gay science, and calls up the ideal of 'a spirit that 
plays naively, i.e. not deliberately but from overflowing abundance and 
power, with everything that was hitherto called holy, good, untouchable, 
divine ... ' This might seem even inhuman in comparison to conven­
tional forms of seriousness, that is to say, solemnity, 
and in spite of all this, it is perhaps only with it that the great 
seriousness really emerges; that the real question mark is posed for 
the first time; that the destiny of the soul changes; the hand of the 
clock moves forward. . . 
Then he adds, at the end of that section, ' ... the tragedy begins'. But 
immediately there comes the last section of all, Epilogue, in which the 
spirits of his own hook tell him to stop these gloomy noises, these 
'voices from the crypt, and marmot whistles'. 'Nicht solche Tone!' they 
cry in an echo of Schiller's Ode to Joy, 'Not such sounds!' He says he 
will give them something else - the poems, presumably, with which he 
ends the hook. But he does so with a final question, and it is a question 
which he wanted his readers to ask themselves not just at the end of this 
hook, but throughout it and indeed throughout all his books - 'Is that 
what you want?' 
XXll 

Chronology 
1844 Bom in Rocken, a small village m the Prussian provmce of 
Saxony, on 1 5 October. 
1846 Birth of his sis ter Elisabeth. 
1848 Birth of his brother Joseph. 
1849 His father, a Lutheran minister, dies at age thirty-six of 'soft­
ening ofthe brain'. 
1850 Brother dies; family moves to Naumburg to live with father's 
mother and her sisters. 
1858 Begins studies at Pforta, Germany's most famous school for 
education in the classics. 
1864 Graduates from Pforta with a thesis in Latin on the Greek poet 
Theognis; en ters the University of Bonn as a theology student. 
1865 Transfers from Bonn, following the classical philologist Friedrich 
Ritschl to Leipzig where he registers as a philology student; reads 
Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation. 
1866 Reads Friedrich Lange's History of Materialism. 
1868 Meets Richard Wagner. 
1869 On Ritschl's recommendation is appointed professor of classical 
philology at Basle at the age of twenty-four before completing 
his doctorate (which is then conferred without a dissertation); 
begins frequent visits to the Wagner residence at Tribschen. 
1870 Serves as a medical orderly in the Franco-Prussian war; con­
tracts a serious illness and so serves only two months. Writes 
'The Dionysiac World View'. 
1872 Publishes his first hook, The Birth of Tragedy; its dedicatory 
preface to Richard Wagner claims for art the role of 'the highest 
XXlll 

Chronology 
task and truly metaphysical activity of his life'; devastating 
reviews follow. 
1873 Publishes 'David Strauss, the Confessor and the Writer', the 
first of his Untimely Meditations; begins taking books on natura! 
science out of the Basle library, whereas he had previously 
confined himself largely to books on philological matters. Writes 
'On Truth and Lying in a Non-Moral Sense'. 
1874 Publishes two more Meditations, 'The Uses and Disadvantages 
ofHistory for Life' and 'Schopenhauer as Educator'. 
1876 Publishes the fourth Meditation, 'Richard Wagner in Bayreuth', 
which already bears subtle signs of his movement away from 
Wagner. 
1878 Publishes Human, All Too Human (dedicated to the memory of 
Voltaire); it praises science over art as the high culture and thus 
marks a decisive turn away from Wagner. 
1879 Terrible health problems force him to resign his chair at Basle 
(with a small pension); publishes 'Assorted Opinions and 
Maxims', the first part of vol. II of Human, All Too Human; 
begins living alone in Swiss and ltalian boarding-houses. 
1880 Publishes 'The Wanderer and His Shadow', which becomes the 
second part of vol. II of Human, All Too Human. 
1881 Publishes Daybreak. 
1882 Publishes ldylls of Messina (eight poems) in a monthly magazine; 
publishes The Cay Science (first edition); friendship with Paul 
Ree and Lou Andreas-Salome ends badly, leaving Nietzsche 
devastated. 
1883 Publishes the first two parts of Thus Spoke Zarathustra; learns of 
Wagner's death just after mailing part one to the publisher. 
1884 Publishes the third part of Thus Spoke Zarathustra. 
1885 Publishes the fourth part of Zarathustra for private circulation 
only. 
1886 Publishes Beyond Cood and Evi!; writes prefaces for new releases 
of: The Birth of Tragedy, Human, All Too Human vols. 1, II, and 
Daybreak. 
1887 Publishes expanded edition of The Cay Science with a new 
preface, a fifth hook, and an appendix of poems; publishes Hymn 
to Lift, a musical work for chorus and orchestra; publishes On 
the Cenealogy of Morality. 
XXIV 

Chronology 
1888 Publishes The Case of Wagner, composes a collection of poems, 
Dionysian Dithyrambs, and four short books: Twilight of Idols, 
The Antichrist, Ecce Homo, and Nietzsche contra Wagner. 
1889 Collapses physically and mentally in Turin on 3 January; writes 
a few lucid notes but never recovers sanity; is briefly institution­
alized; spends remainder of his life as an invalid, living with his 
mother and then his sister, who also gains control of his literary 
estate. 
1900 Dies in Weimar on 25 August. 
XXV 

Further reading 
The standard biography of Nietzsche in English is R. J. Hollingdale, 
Nietzsche: The Man and his Philosophy, recently published in a revised 
and updated second edition (Cambridge University Press, 1999). Lesley 
Chamberlain's Nietzsche in Turin: An Intimate Biography (Picador, 
1997) gives a vivid picture of his life in the period during which he was 
at work on The Cay Science. There are two excellent general introdue­
tions to Nietzsche's philosophy, a short hook by Michael Tanner, 
Nietzsche (Oxford University Press, 1995) and a slightly longer and 
more technical hook by Henry Staten, Nietzsche's Voice (Cornell 
University Press, 1990). Readers interested in Nietzsche's epistemology 
and metaphysics should consult Maudemarie Clark's Nietzsche on Truth 
and Philosophy (Cambridge University Press, 1991), John T. Wilcox, 
Truth and Value in Nietzsche: A Study of his Metaethics and Epistemology 
(University of Michigan Press, 1974), and Ken Gemes, 'Nietzsche's 
Critique ofTruth', Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 52 (1992), 
47-66. Those with an interest in Nietzsche's moral philosophy should 
consult Alexander Nehamas, Nietzsche: Lift as Literature (Harvard 
University Press, 1987). There are two recent helpful discussions of 
Nietzsche's political and social thought: Bruce Detwiler, Nietzsche and 
the Politics of Aristocratic Radicalism (University of Chicago Press, 1990) 
and Mark Warren, Nietzsche and Political Thought (MIT Press, 1988). 
See also Peter Bergmann, Nietzsche, 'the Last Unpolitical German' 
(Indiana University Press, 1987). For an interesting discussion of some 
aspects of Nietzsche's legacy, see Steven E. Ascheim, The Nietzsche 
Legacy in Germany 1890-1990 (University of California Press, 1992). 
XXVI 

Note on the text 
The text used for this translation is printed in the now standard edition 
of Nietzsche's works edited by Giorgia Colli and Mazzino Montinari 
(Berlin, de Gruyter, 1967-77). Their edition, and that of Peter Piitz 
(Munich, Goldmann, 1994), have been used in the preparation of the 
footnotes to this edition. 
XXV!l 

The Gay Science 
('La gaya scienza') 
This house is my own and here I dwell, 
I've never aped nothing from no one 
and - laugh at each master, mark me well, 
who at himself has not poked fun. 
Over my front door. 
The tide is a translation into German (in our edition, into English) of the Proven~al subtitle. 
Gaya scienza ('joyful, cheerful, or gay science') was a term used by the troubadours in the twelfth 
to fourteenth centuries to refer to the art of poetry. In Ecce Homo Nietzsche writes that he has 
used the term gaya scienza here to designate the specific unity of 'singer, knight, and free spirit' 
which was characteristic of early Proven~al culture. 

Preface to the second edition 
I 
This hook might need more than one preface; and in the end there 
would still be room for doubting whether someone who has not 
experienced something similar could, by means of prefaces, be brought 
doser to the experiences of this book. It seems to be written in the 
language of the wind that brings a thaw: it contains high spirits, unrest, 
contradiction, and April weather, so that one is constantly reminded of 
winter's nearness as well as of the triumph over winter that is coming, 
must come, perhaps has already come ... Gratitude flows forth inces­
santly, as if that which was most unexpected had just happened - the 
gratitude of a convalescent - for recovery was what was most unex­
pected. 'Gay Science': this signifies the saturnalia 1 of a mind that has 
patiently resisted a terrible, long pressure - patiently, severely, coldly, 
without yielding, but also without hope - and is now all of a sudden 
attacked by hope, by hope for health, by the intoxication of recovery. Is it 
any wonder that in the process much that is unreasonable and foolish 
comes to light, much wanton tenderness, lavished even on problems 
that have a prickly hide, not made to be fondled and lured? This entire 
book is really nothing but an amusement after long privation and 
powerlessness, the jubilation of returning strength, of a reawakened 
faith in a tomorrow and a day after tomorrow, of a sudden sense and 
anticipation of a future, of impending adventures, of reopened seas, of 
goals that are permitted and believed in again. How many and what 
1 Roman winter festival at which usual bonds of social order were thrown off, social roles were 
reversed, etc. 
3 

The Cay Science 
sorts of things did not lie behind me then! This stretch of desert, 
exhaustion, loss of faith, icing-up in the midst of youth; this onset of 
dotage at the wrong time; this tyranny of pain surpassed still by the 
tyranny of a pride that refused the conclusions of pain - and conclusions 
are consolations; this radical seclusion as a self-def ence against a 
pathologically clairvoyant contempt for humanity, this !imitation in 
principle to what was bitter, harsh, painful to know, as prescribed by the 
nausea that had gradually developed from an incautious and excessively 
luxurious spiritual diet - one calls it romanticism - oh, who could re­
experience all of this as I did? But if anyone could, he would surely 
pardon even more than a bit of foolishness, exuberance, 'gay science' -
for example, the handful of songs that have been added to the book this 
time, songs in which a poet makes fon of all poets in a manner that is 
hard to forgive. Alas, it is not only the poets and their beautiful 'lyrical 
sentiments' on whom this resurrected author has to vent his malice: 
who knows what kind of victim he is looking for, what kind of monster 
will stimulate him to pardon it? Incipit tragoedia,2 we read at the end of 
this suspiciously innocent hook. Beware! Something utterly wicked and 
mischievous is being announced here: incipit parodia, 3 no doubt. 
2 
But let us leave Mr. Nietzsche: what is it to us that Mr Nietzsche has 
got well again? ... A psychologist knows few questions as attractive as 
that concerning the relation between health and philosophy; and should 
he himself become ill, he will bring all of his scientific curiosity into the 
illness. For assuming that one is a person, one necessarily also has the 
philosophy of that person; but here there is a considerable difference. In 
some, it is their weaknesses that philosophize; in others, their riches and 
strengths. The former need their philosophy, be it as a prop, a sedative, 
medicine, redemption, elevation, or self-alienation; for the latter, it is 
only a beautiful luxury, in the best case the voluptuousness of a 
triumphant gratitude that eventually has to inscribe itself in cosmic 
capital letters on the heaven of concepts. In the former, more common 
case, however, when it is distress that philosophizes, as in all sick 
thinkers - and perhaps sick thinkers are in the majority in the history of 
2 'the tragedy begins' 
3 'the parody begins' 
4 

Preface to the second edition 
philosophy - what will become of the thought that is itself subjected to 
the pressure of illness? This is the question that concerns the psycholo­
gist, and here an experiment is possible. Just like a traveller who resolves 
to wake up at a certain hour and then calmly gives himself up to sleep, 
so too we philosophers, should we become ill, temporarily surrender 
with body and soul to the illness - we shut our eyes to ourselves, as it 
were. And as the traveller knows that something is not asleep, something 
that will count the hours and wake him up, we, too, know that the 
decisive moment will find us awake, that something will then leap 
forward and catch the mind in the aet, i.e. in its weakness or repentance 
or hardening or gloom, and whatever else the pathological states of the 
mind are called that on healthy days are opposed by the pride of the 
mind (for the old saying still holds: 'the proud mind, the peacock, and 
the horse are the three proudest animals on earth'). After such self­
questioning, self-temptation, one acquires a subtler eye for all philoso­
phizing to date; one is better than before at guessing the involuntary 
detours, alleyways, resting places, and sunning places of thought to 
which suff ering thinkers are led and misled on account of their 
suffering; one now knows where the sick body and its needs uncon­
sciously urge, push, and lure the mind - towards sun, stillness, 
mildness, patience, medicine, halm in some sense. Every philosophy 
that ranks peace above war, every ethic with a negative definition of 
happiness, every metaphysics and physics that knows some finale, a final 
state of some sort, every predominantly aesthetic or religious craving for 
some Apart, Beyond, Outside, Above, permits the question whether it 
was not illness that inspired the philosopher. The unconscious disguise 
of physiological needs under the cloaks of the objective, ideal, purely 
spiritual goes frighteningly far - and I have asked myself often enough 
whether, on a grand scale, philosophy has been no more than an 
interpretation of the body and a misunderstanding of the body. Behind the 
highest value judgements that have hitherto guided the history of 
thought are concealed misunderstandings of the physical constitution -
of individuals or classes or even whole races. All those bold lunacies of 
metaphysics, especially answers to the question about the value of 
existence, may always be considered first of all as symptoms of certain 
bodies; and if such world affirmations or world negations lack altogether 
any grain of significance when measured scientifically, they give the 
historian and psychologist all the more valuable hints as symptoms 
5 

The Cay Science 
of the body, of its success or failure, its fullness, power and high­
handedness in history, or of its frustrations, fatigues, impoverishments, 
its premonitions of the end, its will to an end. I am still waiting for a 
philosophical physician in the exceptional sense of the term - someone 
who has set himself the task of pursuing the problem of the total health 
of a people, time, race or of humanity - to summon the courage at last 
to push my suspicion to its limit and risk the proposition: what was at 
stake in all philosophizing hitherto was not at all 'truth' but rather 
something else - let us say health, future, growth, power, life ... 
3 
- One might guess that I do not want to take my leave ungratefully from 
that time of severe illness whose profits I have not yet exhausted even 
today: I am well aware of the advantages that my erratic health gives me 
over all burly minds. A philosopher who has passed through many kinds 
of health, and keeps passing through them again and again, has passed 
through an equal number of philosophies; he simply cannot but translate 
his state every time into the most spiritual form and distance - this art 
of transfiguration just is philosophy. We philosophers are not free to 
separate soul from body as the common people do; we are even less free 
to separate soul from spirit. We are no thinking frogs, no objectifying 
and registering devices with frozen innards - we must constantly give 
birth to our thoughts out of our pain and maternally endow them with 
all that we have of blood, heart, fire, pleasure, passion, agony, con­
science, fate, and disaster. Life - to us, that means constantly trans­
forming all that we are into light and flame, and also all that wounds us; 
we simply can do no other. And as for illness: are we not almost tempted 
to ask whether we can do without it at all? Only great pain is the 
liberator of the spirit, as the teacher of the great suspicion that turns 
every U into an X, 4 a real, proper X, that is, the penultimate one before 
the final one. Only great pain, that long, slow pain that takes its time 
and in which we are burned, as it were, over green wood, forces us 
philosophers to descend into our ultimate depths and put aside all trust, 
everything good-natured, veiling, mild, average - things in which 
formerly we may have found our humanity. I doubt that such pain 
4 'to make a U out to be an X' is a standard German expression for trying to pretend that one thing 
is something completely different. 
6 

Preface to the second edition 
makes us 'better' - but I know that it makes us deeper. Whether we learn 
to pit our pride, our scorn, our willpower against it, like the savage who, 
however badly tormented, repays his tormentor with the malice of his 
tongue; or whether we withdraw before pain into the Oriental Nothing­
ness - called Nirvana - into mute, rigid, deaf self-surrender, self­
forgetting, self-extinction: one emerges from such dangerous exercises 
in self-mastery as a different person, with a few more question marks, 
above all with the will henceforth to question further, more deeply, 
severely, harshly, evilly, and quietly than one had previously questioned. 
The trust in life is gone: life itself has become a problem. Yet one should 
not jump to the conclusion that this necessarily makes one sullen. Even 
love of life is still possible - only one loves differently. It is like the love 
for a woman who gives us doubts ... But the attraction of everything 
problematic, the delight in an X, is so great in highly spiritual, 
spiritualized people such as these that this delight flares up like bright 
embers again and again over all the distress of what is problematic, over 
all the dan ger of uncertainty, and even over the jealousy of the lover. We 
know a new happiness. . . 
4 
Finally, lest what is most important remain unsaid: from such abysses, 
from such severe illness, also from the illness of severe suspicion, one 
returns newborn, having shed one's skin, more ticklish and malicious, 
with a more delicate taste for joy, with a more tender tongue for all good 
things, with merrier senses, joyful with a more dangerous second 
innocence, more childlike, and at the same time a hundred times subtler 
than one had ever been before. How repulsive enjoyment is to us now, 
that crude, muggy, brown enjoyment as understood by those who enjoy 
it, our 'educated', our rich, and our rulers! How maliciously we nowa­
days listen to the great fairground boom-boom with which the 'educated 
person' and urbanite today allows art, books and music - aided by 
spirituous beverages - to rape him for 'forms of spiritual enjoyment'! 
How the theatrical cry of passion now hurts our ears; that whole 
romantic uproar and tumult of the senses that is loved by the educated 
mob together with its aspirations towards the sublime, the elevated, the 
distorted, how foreign it has become to our taste! No, if we convales­
cents still need art, it is another kind of art - a mocking, light, fleeting, 
7 

The Cay Science 
divinely untroubled, divinely artificial art that, like a bright flame, blazes 
into an unclouded sky! Above all: an art for artists, only for artists! In 
addition we will know better what is first and foremost needed for that: 
cheerfulness - any cheerfulness, my friends! As artists, too, we will 
know this - I would like to prove it. There are some things we now 
know too well, we knowing ones: oh, how we nowadays learn as artists 
to forget well, to be good at not knowing! And as for our future, one will 
hardly find us again on the paths of those Egyptian youths 5 who make 
temples unsafe at night, embrace statues, and want by all means to 
unveil, uncover, and put into a bright light whatever is kept concealed 
for good reasons. No, we have grown sick of this bad taste, this will to 
truth, to 'truth at any price', this youthful madness in the love of truth: 
we are too experienced, too serious, too jovial, too burned, too deep for 
that. . . We no longer believe that truth remains truth when one pulls off 
the veil; we have lived too much to believe this. Today we consider it a 
matter of decency not to wish to see everything naked, to be present 
everywhere, to understand and 'know' everything. 'Is it true that God is 
everywhere?' a little girl asked her mother; 'I find that indecent!' - a 
hint for philosophers! One should have more respect for the bashfulness 
with which nature has hidden behind riddles and iridescent uncertain­
ties. Perhaps truth is a woman who has grounds for not showing her 
grounds? Perhaps her name is - to speak Greek- Baubo?6 • •• Oh, those 
Greeks! They knew how to live: what is needed for that is to stop 
bravely at the surface, the fold, the skin; to worship appearance, to 
believe in shapes, tones, words - in the whole Olympus of appearance! 
5 Plutarch reports that in a temple in the Egyptian city of Sais, there was a veiled statue of the 
goddess Isis with the inscription: 'I am everything that is, that was, and that will be, and no 
mortal has <ever> raised my veil.' In his Critique of Judgement ( 1790, § 49) Kant says that this 
inscription is the 'perhaps most sublime thing ever said'. In a short historical essay 'Die Sendung 
Moses' the German poet and dramatist Friedrich Schiller (1759-1805) speculates on a possible 
influence of this cult on Moses and thus on the origin of monotheism. Schiller also wrote a poem 
entitled 'Das Verschleierte Bild zu Sais' which told of an Egyptian youth who was especially 
eager to know The Truth. One night he broke into the temple and violated the prohibition by 
lifting the veil, but when found the next morning, he could not report what he had seen and <lied 
an 'early death'. The Romantic poet Novalis (1772-1801) gives two further variants (1798-9). In 
the first the youth left the young woman he loved, Rosenbltitchen, to go in search of wisdom, 
truth, etc. When he arrived at the temple he fell asleeep and dreamed that when he lifted the veil 
of the statue 'Rosenbltitchen sank into his arms'. In the second variant, when he lifted the veil, he 
saw himself. See also below, § 57. 
6 When the goddess Demeter was grieving for the abduction of her daughter by Hades, god of the 
underworld, the witch Baubo made her laugh again for the first time by lifting her skirts and 
exposing herself. 
8 

Preface to the second edition 
Those Greeks were superficial - out of profundity! And is not this 
precisely what we are coming back to, we daredevils of the spirit who 
have climbed the highest and most dangerous peak of current thought 
and looked around from up there, looked down from up there? Are we 
not just in this respect - Greeks? Worshippers of shapes, tones, words? 
And therefore - artists? 
9 
Ruta near Genoa 
Autumn, 1886 

'Joke, Cunning, and Revenge' 
Prelude in German Rhymes 
I. Invitation 
Dare to taste my fare, clear diner! 
Come tomorrow it tastes finer 
and day after even good! 
If you still want more - 1'11 make it, 
from past inspiration take it, 
turning food for thought to food. 
2. My Happiness 
Since I grew weary of the search 
I taught myself to find instead. 
Since cross winds caused my ship to lurch 
I sail with all winds straight ahead. 
'Scherz, List, und Rache' is the title of a libretto written by Goethe and set to music by Peter 
Gast, Nietzsche's friend and disciple/ secretary. The title itself, like the subtitle 'Prelude in 
German Rhymes', foreshadows the musical playfulness to be found both in the poems and in The 
Cay Science; it also voices the hope that readers will recognize in the German language a medium 
of grace and style, as seen for example in the writings of Goethe and Nietzsche. Scherz, List und 
Rache was not set to music in the 1780s, though Goethe had intended it for a composer, and he 
published it in 1790 with his other works. He had endeavoured in the 1780s, after his ltalian 
journey, to reform the German comic opera in the direction of the Italian opera bujfa. 
II 

The Cay Science 
3. Undaunted 
Where you stand, there dig deep! 
Below you lies the well! 
Let obscurantists wail and weep: 
'Below is always - hell!' 
4. Dialogue 
A. Was I ill? Have I recovered? 
Has my doctor been discovered? 
How have I forgotten all? 
B. Now I know you have recovered: 
Healthy is who can't recall. 
5. To the Virtuous 
Our virtues too should step lively to and fro: 
Like the verses of Homer, they have to come and go! 
6. Worldly Wisdom 
Stay not where the lowlands are! 
Climb not into the sky! 
The world looks best by far 
when viewed from halfway high. 
7. Vademecum - Vadetecum1 
My way and language speak to you, 
you follow me, pursue me too? 
To thine own self and way be true: 
Thus follow me, but gently do! 
8. On the Third Shedding 
Already cracks and breaks my skin, 
my appetite unslaking 
is fuelled by earth l've taken in: 
1 Vademecum is Latin for 'go with me', and refers to a hook one carries all the time. Vadetecum is 
Nietzsche's improvement on the idea: 'go with yourself'. 
12 

'Joke, Cunning and Revenge ': Prelude in German Rhymes 
This snake for earth is aching. 
Among the stones and grass I wear 
a path from fen to firth, 
to eat what's always been my fare 
you, my snake food, you my earth. 
9. My Roses 
Yes! My joy - it wants to gladden - , 
every joy wants so to gladden! 
Would you pluck my rose and sadden? 
You must crouch on narrow ledges, 
prop yourself on ropes and wedges, 
prick yourself on thorny hedges! 
For my joy - it loves to madden! 
For my joy - is malice laden! 
Would you pluck my rose and sadden? 
10. The Scornful One 
Much do I let fall and spill, 
thus l'm scornful, you malign. 
One who drinks from cups too full will 
often let much fall and spill - , 
yet never think to blame the wine. 
11. The Proverb Speaks 
Sharp and mild, dull and keen, 
well known and strange, dirty and clean, 
where both the fool and wise are seen: 
All this am I, have ever been, -
in me dove, snake and swine convene! 
12. Toa Friend of Light 
If you want to spare your eyes and your mind, 
follow the sun from the shadows behind. 
13 

The Cay Science 
IJ. For Dancers 
Slipp'ry ice 
is paradise 
as long as dancing will suffice. 
I 4. The Good Man 
Better an enmity cut from one block 
than friendship held together by glue. 
IS. Rust 
Rust must be added: sharpness goes unsung! 
Else they will always say: 'He is too young!' 
I6. Upward 
'How do I best get to the top of this hill?' 
'Climb it, don't think it, and maybe you will.' 
I7. Motto of A Brute 
Never beg! lt's whining I dread! 
Take, I beg you, just take instead! 
I8. Narrow Souls 
lt's narrow souls that I despise; 
not good, not evil, not my size. 
I9. The Involuntary Seducer 
He shot an empty word into the blue 
to pass the time - and downed a woman too. 
20. Consider This 
A twofold pain is easier to bear 
than one pain: care to take a dare? 
14 

'Joke, Cunning and Revenge ': Prelude in German Rhymes 
21. Against Arrogance 
Don't let your ego swell too much, 
a bubble bursts with just a touch. 
22. Man and Female 
'Rob yourself the female, who to your heart appeals!' -
So thinks a man; but she won't rob, a woman only steals. 
23. Interpretation 
Ifl read me, then I read into me: 
I can't construe myself objectively. 
But he who climbs consuming his own might 
bears me with him unto the brighter light. 
24. Medication for Pessimists2 
You whine that nothing pleases you? 
Still pouting, friend, and must you mutter? 
I hear you curse, and shout and sputter -
it breaks my heart and patience too! 
Come with me, friend! A nice fat toad, 
if swallowed voluntarily 
with eyes closed and summarily -
might Jessen your dyspeptic load. 
25. Request 
I know another person's thought 
and who I am, I know that not. 
My vision is too close tome -
I am not what I saw and see. 
l'd use myself more perfectly 
if I could move away from me. 
Yet not so distant as my foe! 
My closest friend's too far off, no -
2 Nietzsche's inspiration for the toad as medicine derives from a maxim by Chamfort, to the effect 
that a toad ingested each morning will make the rest of the day taste better. 
15 

The Cay Science 
give me instead the middle ground! 
Do you surmise what I propound? 
26. My Hardness 
I must leave by a hundred stairs, 
I must ascend though I hear your cares: 
'You are hard: Are we made of stone?' 
I must leave by a hundred stairs, 
And being a stair appeals to none. 
27. The Wanderer 
'The path ends! Abyss and deathly silence loom!' 
You wanted this! Your will strayed to its doom! 
Now wanderer, stand! Be keen and cool as frost! 
Believe in <langer now and you - are lost. 
28. Consolation for Beginners 
See the child, with pigs she's lying, 
helpless, face as white as chalk! 
Crying only, only crying -
will she ever learn to walk? 
Don't give up! Stop your sighing, 
soon she's dancing 'round the clock! 
Once her own two legs are trying, 
she'll stand on her head and mock. 
29. Stel/ar Egotism 
If I, round barrel that I am, 
did not roll 'round me like a cam, 
how could I bear, and not catch fire, 
to the chase the sun as I desire? 
30. The Closest One 
The closest one from me I bar: 
Away and up with him, and far! 
How else could he become my star? 

Joke, Cunning and Revenge ': Prelude in German Rhymes 
31. The Disguised Saint 
Joy too great you are concealing, 
you engage in dev'lish dealing, 
devil's wit and devil's dress. 
But no use! Your eye's revealing 
piety and holiness! 
32. The Bound Man 
A. He stands and hears: what's wrong, he's thinking? 
What sound provokes his heart to sinking? 
What was it hurled him to the ground? 
B. Like all who once in chains were bound, 
He hears around him - iron clinking. 
33. The Solitary One 
Despised by me are foliowing and leading. 
Commanding? Even worse to me than heeding! 
Who does not scare himself can frighten no one: 
The one who causes fear can lead another. 
But just to lead myself is too much bother! 
I love, as do the sea and forest creatures, 
to Jose myself a while in nature's features, 
to hide away and brood in secret places 
until, lured home at last from distant traces, 
my self-seduction Jets me see - my features. 
34. Seneca et hoc genus omne3 
They write and write their desiccat­
ing learned la-di-da-di, 
as if primum scribere, 
deinde philosophari. 
35. Ice 
Yes! At times I do make ice: 
Useful is ice for digesting! 
3 Seneca (Roman philosopher) and his lot. The Latin: 'First write, then philosophize.' 

The Cay Science 
If you had much for digesting, 
oh how you would love my ice! 
36. Juvenilia 4 
My old wisdom's A and 0 
sounded here: what did I hear? 
Now it does not strike me so, 
just the tired Ah! and Oh! 
that youth inspired fills my ear. 
37. Caution 
lnto that region trav'lers must not go: 
And if you're smart, be cautious even so! 
They lure and love you till you're torn apart: 
They're halfwit zealots - : witless from the heart! 
38. The Pious One Speaks 
God loves us because he created us! 
'Man created God!' - respond the jaded. 
And yet should not love what he created? 
Should even deny it because he made it? 
Such doven logic is limping and baited. 
39. In Summer 5 
Beneath the sweat of our own brow 
we have to eat our bread? 
If you sweat, eat nothing now, 
the wise physician said. 
The Dog Star winks: what does it know? 
What says its fiery winking? 
Beneath the sweat of our own brow 
our wine we should be drinking! 
4 Alpha and Omega are the first and last !etters of the Greek alphabet, hence proverbially the 
'alpha and omega' are said to comprise everything. 
5 Genesis 3:19: 'In the sweat ofthy face shalt thou eat bread.' 

'Joke, Cunning and Revenge ': Prelude in German Rhymes 
40. Without Envy 
His gaze is envyless: and him you praise? 
No thirst for your esteem perturbs his gaze; 
he has the eagle's vision for the long view, 
it's stars he sees, just stars - he looks beyond you! 
41. H eracliteanism 
Happiness on earth, friends, 
only stems from war! 
Powder smoke, in faet, mends 
friendship even more! 
One in three all friends are: 
Brothers in distress, 
equals facing rivals, 
free men - facing death! 
42. Principle of the All-Too-Refined 
Rather on your tiptoes stand 
than crawling on all fours! 
Rather through the keyhole scanned 
than gazed through open doors! 
43. Admonition 
It's farne on which your mind is set? 
Then heed what I say: 
Before too long prepare to let 
honor slip away. 
44. The Well-Grounded One6 
A scholar I? l've no such skill! -
I'm merely grave - just heavy set! 
I fall and fall and fall until 
I to the bottom get. 
6 Griindlich in German means thorough, based on Grund (ground). 

The Cay Science 
45. Forever 
'Today I come, I choose today' -
think all who come and mean to stay. 
Though all the world may speculate: 
'You come too early! Come too late!' 
46. Judgements ofthe Weary 
The sun is cursed by all men jaded; 
to them the worth of trees is - shaded! 
47. Going Down7 
'He sinks, he falls now' - thus resumes your mocking; 
in truth, look closely: Down to you he's walking! 
His super-joy became too much to bear, 
his super-light dispels your gloomy air. 
48. Against the Laws 
From now on time hangs by a hair 
around my neck, suspended there: 
from now on stars shine randomly, 
sun, rooster crow, and shadow flee, 
whatever brought time to my mind 
that now is mute and deaf and blind: -
All nature's still in me, it balks 
at ticking laws and ticking clocks. 
49. The Wise Man Speaks 
Unknown to folks, yet useful to the crowd, 
I drift along my way, now sun, now cloud 
and always I'm above this crowd! 
7 Niedergang means decline, but it is ambiguous because it is formed from nieder (down) and the 
past participle of gehen (to go). Compare Zarathustra's 'going under' in the prologue of Thus 
Spoke Zarathustra. 
20 

Joke, Cunning and Revenge ': Prelude in German Rhymes 
50. Lost His Head 
Now she has wit - what led her to this find? 
Because of her a man had lost his mind. 
His head was rich before this misadventure: 
His head went straight to heil - no! no! to her! 
5 1. Pious Wishes8 
'Keys should all just disappear, 
lost from stem to stern, 
and in keyholes far and near 
skeletons should turn!' 
Thus thinks when the day is done 
each who is - a skeleton. 
52. Writing With One 's Foot 
I do not write with hand alone: 
My foot does writing ofits own. 
Firm, free, and bold my feet engage 
in running over field and page. 
53. 'Human, All Too Human. 'A Book9 
When looking back you're sad and not robust, 
you trust the future when yourself you trust: 
Oh bird, do you belong to eagle's brood? 
Are you Minerva's favourite hoot hoot? 
54. To My Reader 
Strong teeth and good digestion too -
this I wish thee! 
And once my book's agreed with you, 
then surely you'll agree with me! 
8 Dietrich in German is a skeleton key, or combination key capable of opening any Jock. It is also a 
common given name for males. 
9 Minerva, Roman goddess of wisdom, the arts and crafts, and medicine, was identified with the 
Greek goddess Athene, whose attribute was the sacred and wise owl. Uhu is the German word for 
eagle-owl, as well as the sound (hooting) made by owls. 
21 

The Cay Science 
55. The Realistic Painter 
'To all of nature true!' - How does he plan? 
Would nature fit an image made by man? 
The smallest piece of world is infinite! -
He ends up painting that which he sees.fit. 
And what does he see fit? Paint what he can! 
56. Poet's Vanity 
1'11 find wood, just give me substance 
strong enough to bind like glue! 
Cramming sense in rhyme is nonsense 
worthy of a boast - or two! 
57. Choosy Taste 
Were it my choice to exercise, 
I know that I would opt for 
a cosy place in Paradise: 
Better still - outside the door! 
58. The Crooked Nose10 
Your nose projects, so grand and plump, 
into the land, its nostrils pump -
thus hornJess rhino, lacking grace 
you fall, proud mortal, on your face! 
And that's the way it always goes: 
Straight pride alongside crooked nose. 
59. The Pen Scribbles 
My pen, it scribbles: this is heil! 
Have I been damned to have to scribble? -
I dip it boldly in the well 
and write broad streams of inky drive!. 
See how it flows, so full, so pure! 
See how each thing I try succeeds! 
10 Nashorn means rhinoceros, from Nase (nose) and Horn. 
22 

'Joke, Cunning and Revenge ': Prelude in German Rhymes 
The text's not lucid, to be sure -
So what? What I write no one reads. 
60. Higher Men 
He climbs on high - him we should praise! 
But that one comes from high up always! 
Immune to praise he lives his days, 
he is the sun's rays! 
61. The Sceptic Speaks 
Your life is halfway spent, 
the clock hand moves, your soul now quakes with fear! 
Long roaming forth it went 
and searched but nothing found - and wavers here? 
Your life is halfway spent: 
In pain and error how the hours did crawl! 
Why can you not relent? -
Just this I seek - some reason for it all! 
62. Ecce Homo 
Yes! I know now whence I came! 
Unsatiated like a flame 
my glowing ember squanders me. 
Light to all on which I seize, 
ashen everything I leave: 
Flame am I most certainly! 
63. Stellar Morals 
Ordained to move as planets do, 
what matters, star, the dark to you? 
Roll blithely through our human time! 
Beyond its wretched mis'ry climb! 
The furthest world deserves your shine: 
For you compassion is a crime! 
One law applies to you: be thine! 

Book One 

Book One 
I 
The teachers of the purpose of existence. - Whether I regard human beings 
with a good or with an evil eye, I always find them engaged in a single 
task, each and every one of them: to do what benefits the preservation of 
the human race. Not from a feeling of love for the race, but simply 
because within them nothing is older, stronger, more inexorable and 
invincible than this instinct - because this instinct constitutes the essence 
of our species and herd. One might quickly enough, with the usual 
myopia from five steps away, divide one's neighbours into useful and 
harmful, good and evil; but on a large-scale assessment, upon further 
reflection on the whole, one grows suspicious of this tidying and 
separating and finally abandons it. Even the most harmful person may 
actually be the most useful when it comes to the preservation of the 
species; for he nurtures in himself or through his eff ects on others 
drives without which humanity would long since have become feeble or 
rotten. Hatred, delight in the misfortunes of others, the lust to rob and 
rule, and whatever else is called evil: all belong to the amazing economy 
of the preservation of the species, an economy which is certainly costly, 
wasteful, and on the whole most foolish - but still proven to have 
preserved our race so far. I no longer know whether you, my dear fellow 
man and neighbour, are even capable of living in a way which is 
damaging to the species, i.e. 'unreasonably' and 'badly'. What might 
have harmed the species may have become extinct many thousands of 
years ago and may by now belong to the things that are no longer 
possible even for God. Pursue your hest or your worst desires, and 
above all, perish! In both cases you are probably still in some way a 
promoter and benefactor of humanity and are thus entitled to your 
eulogists - as well as to your mockers! But you will never find someone 
who could completely mock you, the individual, even in your hest 
qualities, someone who could bring home to you as far as truth allows 
your boundless, fly- and frog-like wretchedness! To laugh at oneself as 
one would have to laugh in order to laugh.from the whole truth - for that, 
not even the hest have had enough sense of truth, and the most gifted 
have had far too little genius! Perhaps even laughter still has a future -
when the proposition 'The species is everything, an individual is always 
nothing' has become part of humanity and this ultimate liberation and 
irresponsibility is accessible to everyone at all times. Perhaps laughter 
27 

The Cay Science 
will then have formed an alliance with wisdom; perhaps only 'gay 
science' will remain. At present, things are still quite different; at 
present, the comedy of existence has not yet 'become conscious' of 
itself; at present, we still live in the age of tragedy, in the age of 
moralities and religions. What is the meaning of the ever-new appear­
ance of these founders of moralities and religions, of these instigators of 
fights about moral valuations, these teachers of pangs of conscience and 
religious wars? What is the meaning of these heroes on this stage? For 
these have been the heroes thus far; and everything else, even if at times 
it was all that we could see and was far too near, has always served only 
to set the stage for these heroes, whether as machinery and backdrop or 
in the role of confidant and servant. (The poets, for example, were 
always the servants of some kind of morality.) It is obvious that these 
tragedies, too, work in the interest of the species, even if they should 
believe that they are working in the interest of God, as God's emissaries. 
They, too, promote the life of the species by promoting the faith in life. 
'Life is worth living', each of them shouts, 'there is something to life, 
there is something behind life, beneath it; beware!' This drive, which 
rules the highest as well as the basest of human beings - the drive for 
the preservation of the species - erupts from time to time as reason and 
passion of mind; it is then surrounded by a resplendent retinue of 
reasons and tries with all its might to make us forget that fundamentally 
it is drive, instinct, stupidity, lack of reasons. Life ought to be loved, 
because -! Man ought to advance himself and his neighbour, because -! 
What names all these Oughts and Becauses have been given and may yet 
be given in the future! The ethical teacher makes his appearance as the 
teacher of the purpose of existence in order that what happens necessa­
rily and always, by itself and without a purpose, shall henceforth seem 
to be done for a purpose and strike man as reason and an ultimate 
commandment; to this end he invents a second, different existence and 
takes by means of his new mechanics the old, ordinary existence off its 
old, ordinary hinges. To be sure, in no way does he want us to laugh at 
existence, or at ourselves - or at him; for him, an individual is always an 
individual, something first and last and tremendous; for him there are 
no species, sums, or zeroes. Foolish and fanciful as his inventions and 
valuations may be, badly as he may misjudge the course of nature and 
deny its conditions - and all ethical systems hitherto have been so 
foolish and contrary to nature that humanity would have perished from 
28 

Book One 
every one had it gained power over humanity- all the same! Every time 
'the hero' appeared on stage, something new was attained: the gruesome 
counterpart of laughter, that profound shock that many individuals feel 
at the thought: 'Yes, living is worth it! Yes, I am worthy of living!' Life 
and I and you and all of us became interesting to ourselves once again for 
a while. There is no denying that in the long run each of these great 
teachers of a purpose was vanquished by laughter, reason and nature: 
the brief tragedy always changed and returned into the eternal comedy 
of existence, and the 'waves of uncountable laughter' - to cite 
Aeschylus1 - must in the end also come crashing down on the greatest 
of these tragedians. Despite all this corrective laughter, human nature 
on the whole has surely been altered by the recurring emergence of such 
teachers of the purpose of existence - it has acquired one additional need, 
the need for the repeated appearance of such teachers and such 
teachings of a 'purpose'. Man has gradually become a fantastic animal 
that must fulfil one condition of existence more than any other animal: 
man must from time to time believe he knows why he exists; his race 
cannot thrive without a periodic trust in life - without faith in the reason 
in lift! And ever again the human race will from time to time decree: 
'There is something one is absolutely forbidden henceforth to laugh at.' 
And the most cautious friend of man will add: 'Not only laughter and 
gay wisdom but also the tragic, with all its sublime unreason, belongs to 
the means and necessities of the preservation of the species.' And 
therefore! Therefore! Therefore! Oh, do you understand me, my 
brothers? Do you understand this new law of ebb and flood? We, too, 
have our time! 
2 
lntellectual conscience. - I keep having the same experience and keep 
resisting it anew each time; I do not want to believe it although I can 
grasp it as with my bands: the great majority lacks an intellectual 
conscience - indeed, it has often seemed to me as if someone requiring 
such a conscience would be as lonely in the most densely populated 
cities as he would be in the desert. Everyone looks at you with strange 
1 A mistranslation of lines 89-90 of Prometheus Bound formerly ascribed to the fifth-century (B c) 
Athenian dramatist Aeschylus. The lines actually read: 'countless laughter of the sea waves'. 
29 

The Cay Science 
eyes and goes on handling their scales, calling this good and that evil; 
nobody as much as blushes when you notice that their weights are 
underweight - nor do they become indignant with you; perhaps they 
laugh at your doubts. I mean: to the great majority it is not contemptible 
to believe this or that and to live accordingly without first becoming 
aware of the final and most certain reasons pro and con, and without 
even troubling themselves about such reasons afterwards: the most 
gifted men and the noblest women still belong to this 'great majority'. 
But what are goodheartedness, refinement, and genius to me when the 
person possessing these virtues tolerates slack feelings in his believing 
and judging and when he does not consider the desire for certainty to be 
his inmost craving and deepest need - as that which separates the 
higher human beings from the lower! I discovered in certain pious 
people a hatred of reason and I was well disposed towards them for that: 
at least this betrayed their bad intellectual conscience! But to stand in 
the midst of this rerum concordia discors2 and the whole marvellous 
uncertainty and ambiguity of existence without questioning, without 
trembling with the craving and rapture of questioning, without at least 
hating the person who questions, perhaps even being faintly amused by 
him - that is what I feel to be contemptible, and this is the feeling I look 
for first in anyone. Some folly keeps persuading me that every person 
has this feeling, simply as human. That is my type of injustice. 
3 
Noble and common. - For common natures all noble, magnanimous 
feelings appear to be inexpedient and therefore initially incredible: they 
give a wink when they hear of such things and seem to want to say, 
'Surely there must be some advantage involved; one cannot see through 
every wall' - they are suspicious of the noble person, as if he were 
furtively seeking his advantage. If they become all too clearly convinced 
of the absence of selfish intentions and gains, they view the noble person 
as a kind of fool: they despise him in his pleasure and laugh at the 
sparkle in his eye. 'How could one enjoy being at a disadvantage? How 
could one want with open eyes to be disadvantaged? Some disease of 
reason must be linked to the noble affection' - thus they think and look 
2 'the discordant harmony ofthings'; from Horace, Epistles 1.12.19 
30 

Book One 
disparagingly, the way they disparage the pleasure that a madman 
derives from his fixed idea. What distinguishes the common nature is 
that it unflinchingly keeps sight of its advantage, and that this thought 
of purpose and advantage is even stronger than its strongest drives; not 
to allow these drives to lead it astray to perform inexpeditious acts -
that is its wisdom and self-esteem. In comparison, the higher nature is 
more unreasonable - for the noble, magnanimous, and self-sacrificing 
person does in faet succumb to his drives; and in his hest moments, his 
reason pauses. An animal that protects its young at the risk of its own life 
or during the mating period follows the female unto death does not 
think of <langer and death; its reason likewise pauses because the 
pleasure in its brood or in the female and the fear of being deprived of 
this pleasure dominate it totally; the animal becomes stupider than it 
usually is - just like the person who is noble and magnanimous. Such 
persons have several f eelings of pleasure and displeasure so strong that 
they reduce the intellect to silence or to servitude: at that point their 
heart displaces their head, and one speaks thenceforth of 'passion'. 
(Occasionally we also encounter the opposite, the 'reversal of passion', 
as it were; for example, somebody once laid his hand on Fontenelle's 
heart and said, 'What you have here, my clear sir, is also brains. '3) The 
unreason or odd reason ( Unvernunft oder Quervernunft) of passion is 
what the common type despises in the noble, especially when this 
passion is directed at objects whose value seems quite fantastic and 
arbitrary. He is annoyed by the person who succumbs to the passion of 
the belly, but at least he comprehends the appeal that plays the tyrant in 
this case; but he cannot comprehend how anyone could, for example, 
risk health and honour for the sake of a passion for knowledge. The 
higher nature's taste is for exceptions, for things that leave most people 
cold and seem to lack sweetness; the higher nature has a singular value 
standard. Moreover, it usually believes that the idiosyncrasy of its taste 
is not a singular value standard; rather, it posits its values and disvalues 
as generally valid and so becomes incomprehensible and impractical. It 
is very rare that a higher nature has enough reason left over to 
understand and treat commonplace people as what they are; above all, it 
believes in its own passion as something that is present in everyone but 
3 French writer of fables (1657- 1757); his most important work is the Dialogues of the Dead (1683) 
to which Nietzsche refers in § 94. 
31 

The Cay Science 
concealed, and in this belief it is full of ardour and eloquence. Now 
when such exceptional people do not themselves feel like exceptions, 
how can they ever understand the common natures and arrive at a 
proper estimate of the rule! - and so they, too, speak of the stupidity, 
inexpedience, and fancifulness of humanity, stunned that the world is 
taking such an insane course and that it will not commit itself to that 
which 'is needful'. - This is the eternal injustice of the noble. 
4 
What preserves the species. - The strongest and most evil spirits have so 
far done the most to advance humanity: time and again they rekindled 
the dozing passions - every ordered society puts the passions to sleep - , 
time and again they reawakened the sense of comparison, of contra­
diction, of delight in what is new, daring, unattempted; they forced men 
to pit opinion against opinion, ideal model against ideal model. Mostly 
by force of arms, by toppling boundary stones, by violating pieties - but 
also by means of new religions and moralities! In every teacher and 
preacher of what is new we find the same 'mischief' that makes 
conquerors infamous, even if its expression is subtler and does not 
instantly set the muscles in motion and for just that reason does not 
make one as infamous! What is new, however, is under all circumstances 
evil, being that which wants to conquer, to overthrow the old boundary 
stones and pieties; and only what is old is good! In every age the good 
men are those who bury the old thoughts deeply and make them bear 
fruit - the farmers of the spirit. But that land is eventually exhausted, 
and the ploughshare of evil must come time and again. Nowadays there 
is a thoroughly erroneous moral theory which is celebrated especially in 
England: it claims that judgements of 'good' and 'evil' sum up experi­
ences of what is 'expedient' and 'inexpedient'; that what is called good 
preserves the species while what is called evil harms it. In truth, 
however, the evil drives are just as expedient, species-preserving, and 
indispensable as the good ones - they just have a different function. 
5 
Unconditional duties. - All persons who feel that they need the strongest 
words and sounds, the most eloquent gestures and postures, in order to 
32 

Book One 
be effective at all - revolutionary politicians, socialists, preachers of 
repentance with or without Christianity, all of whom refuse to accept 
semi-successes: they all speak of 'duties', and indeed always of duties 
with an unconditional character - without such duties they would have 
no right to their great pathos; they know that quite well! So they reach 
for moral philosophies that preach some categorical imperative, or they 
ingest a goodly piece of religion, as Mazzini 4 did, for example. Because 
they want the unconditional confidence of others, they first need 
unconditional confidence in themselves on the basis of some ultimate, 
indisputable and inherently sublime commandment, and they want to 
feel like and pass themselves off as its servants and instruments. Here 
we have the most natura! and usually very influential opponents of 
moral enlightenment and scepticism; but they are rare. On the other 
hand, a very comprehensive class of these opponents can be found 
wherever self-interest teaches submission while reputation and honour 
seem to prohibit it. Whoever feels his dignity violated by the thought of 
being the instrument of a prince or party or sect or even a financial power 
- say, as the descendant of an old, proud family - but still wants to or 
must be this instrument befare himself and befare the public, needs 
poignant principles that can be mouthed any time, principles of an 
unconditional 'ought' to which one may openly submit and be seen to 
have submitted without shame. All refined servility clings to the 
categorical imperative and is the mortal enemy of those who want to 
deprive duty of its unconditional character: that is what decency 
demands of them, and not only decency. 
6 
Lass of dignity. - Reflection has lost all its dignity of form: we have made 
a laughing-stock of the ceremony and solemn gestures of reflection, and 
couldn't stand an old-style wise man. We think too fast, while on our 
way somewhere, while walking or in the midst of all sorts of business, 
even when thinking of the most serious things; we need little prepara­
tion, not even much silence: it is as if we carried around in our heads an 
unstoppable machine that keeps working even under the most unfavour­
able circumstances. Formerly, one could tell just by looking at a person 
4 Italian liberal (1805-72). 
33 

The Cay Science 
that he wanted to think - it was probably a rare occurrence! - , that he 
now wanted to become wiser and was preparing himself for a thought: 
one would set one's face as for prayer and stop walking; yes, one stood 
still for hours on the street once the thought 'arrived' - on one or two 
legs. The dignity of the matter required it! 
7 
Something for the industrious. - Anyone who now wishes to make a study 
of moral matters opens up for himself an immense field of work. All 
kinds of passions have to be thought through separately, pursued 
separately through ages, peoples, great and small individuals; their 
entire reason and all their evaluations and modes of illuminating things 
must be revealed! So far, all that has given colour to existence still lacks 
a history: where could you find a history of love, of avarice, of envy, of 
conscience, of piety, of cruelty? Even a comparative history of law or 
even of punishment is so far lacking entirely. Has anyone done research 
on the different ways of dividing up the day or of the consequences of a 
regular schedule of work, festivals, and the rest? Do we know the moral 
effects of foods? Is there a philosophy of nutrition? (The incessantly 
erupting clamour for and against vegetarianism proves that there is still 
no such philosophy!) Has anyone collected people's experiences of 
living together - in monasteries, for example? Has anyone depicted the 
dialectic of marriage and friendship? The customs of scholars, busi­
nessmen, artists, artisans - have they found their thinkers? There is so 
much in them to think about! Everything that humans have viewed until 
now as the 'conditions of their existence' and all the reason, passion, 
and superstition that such a view involves - has this been researched 
exhaustively? To observe how differently the human drives have grown 
and still could grow depending on the moral climate - that alone 
involves too much work for even the most industrious; it would require 
whole generations, and generations of scholars who would collaborate 
systematically, to exhaust the points of view and the material. The same 
applies to the demonstration of the reasons for the variety of moral 
climates ('why does the sun of one fundamental moral judgement and 
primary value-standard shine here - and another one there?'). Yet 
another new project would be to determine the erroneousness of all 
these reasons and the whole essence of moral judgements to date. If all 
34 

Book One 
these jobs were done, the most delicate question of all would emerge in 
the foreground: whether science is able to furnish goals of action after 
having proved that it can take such goals away and annihilate them; and 
then an experimenting would be in order, in which every kind of 
heroism could find satisfaction - an experimenting that might last for 
centuries and eclipse all the great projects and sacrifices of history to 
date. So far, science has not yet built its cyclops-buildings; 5 but the time 
for that will come, too. 
8 
Unconscious virtues. - All qualities of a person of which he is conscious -
and especially those he supposes to be visible and plain to others also -
are subject to laws of development entirely different from those qualities 
which are unknown or badly known to him, which conceal themselves 
by means of their subtlety even from the eye of a rather subtle observer 
and which know how to hide as if behind nothing at all. This might be 
compared to the subtle sculptures on the scales of reptiles: it would be a 
mistake to take them for ornaments or weapons, since one sees them 
only with a microscope, i.e. with an artificially sharpened eye, which 
similar animals for whom they might signify something like ornaments 
or weapons simply lack. Our visible moral qualities, and especially those 
that we believe to be visible, take their course; and the invisible ones, 
which have the same names but are neither ornaments nor weapons 
with regard to others, also take their course: probably a totally different 
one, with lines and subtleties and sculptures that might amuse a god 
with a divine microscope. For example, we have our diligence, our 
ambition, our acuteness - all the world knows about them - and in 
addition, we probably also have our industry, our ambition, our acute­
ness; but for these reptile scales, no microscope has yet been invented! 
At this point the friends of instinctive morality will say: 'Bravo! At least 
he considers unconscious virtues to be possible - and that's enough for 
us.' Oh, how little you are satisfied with! 
5 The Cyclopes, in ancient mythology, were one-eyed giants. Though represented in Homer as 
wild creatures, they elsewhere appear as workmen of superhuman power, and were credited with 
building massive ancient fortifications such as those of Tiryns. 
35 

The Cay Science 
9 
Our eruptions. - Countless things that humanity acquired in earlier 
stages, but so feebly and embryonically that no one could tell that they 
had been acquired, suddenly emerge into the light much later, perhaps 
after centuries; meanwhile they have become strong and ripe. Some 
ages seem to lack completely some talent or virtue, just as some people 
do: but just wait for their children and grandchildren, if you have time 
to wait - they bring to light the inner qualities of their grandfathers, the 
qualities that their grandfathers themselves did not know about. Often 
it is already the son that betrays his father: the father understands 
himself better once he has a son. All of us harbour in ourselves bidden 
gardens and plantations; and, to use another metaphor, we are all 
growing volcanoes approaching their hour of eruption; how near or 
distant that is, of course, nobody knows, not even the good Lord. 
IO 
A kind of atavism. - I prefer to understand the rare human beings of an 
age as suddenly appearing, late ghosts of past cultures and their powers: 
as atavisms of a people and its mores - that way one can really understand 
something about them! They now seem strange, rare, extraordinary; 
and whoever feels these powers in himself must nurse, defend, honor, 
and cultivate them against another world that resists them: and so he 
becomes either a great human being or a mad and eccentric one, unless 
he perishes too soon. Formerly, these same qualities were common and 
therefore considered ordinary: they weren't distinguishing. They were 
perhaps demanded, presupposed; it was impossible to become great 
through them, if only because there was also no <langer of becoming 
mad and lonely through them. It is principally in the generations and 
castes that conserve a people that we find such recrudescences of old 
instincts, while such atavism is highly improbable where races, habits, 
and valuations change too rapidly. For tempo is as significant a power in 
the development of peoples as in music: in our case, what is absolutely 
necessary is an andante of development, as the tempo of a passionate and 
slow spirit - and that is after all what the spirit of conservative 
generations is like. 

Book One 
Il 
Consciousness (Bewuj1tsein)6 - Consciousness (BewujJtheit) is the latest 
development of the organic, and hence also its most unfinished and 
unrobust feature. Consciousness gives rise to countless mistakes that 
lead an animal or human being to perish sooner than necessary, 'beyond 
destiny', as Homer puts it. 7 If the preserving alliance of the instincts 
were not so much more powerful, if it did not serve on the whole as a 
regulator, humanity would have to perish with open eyes of its misjud­
ging and its fantasizing, of its lack of thoroughness and its incredulity -
in short, of its consciousness; or rather, without the instincts, humanity 
would long have ceased to exist! Before a function is fully developed and 
mature, it constitutes a <langer to the organism; it is a good thing for it 
to be properly tyrannized in the meantime! Thus, consciousness is 
properly tyrannized - and not least by one's pride in it! One thinks it 
constitutes the kernel of man, what is abiding, eternal, ultimate, most 
original in himl One takes consciousness to be a given determinate 
magnitude! One denies its growth and intermittences! Sees it as 'the 
unity of the organism'! This ridiculous overestimation and misappre­
hension of consciousness has the very useful consequence that an all­
too-rapid development of consciousness was prevented. Since they 
thought they already possessed it, human beings did not take much 
trouble to acquire it - and things are no different today! The task of 
assimilating knowledge and making it instinctive is still quite new; it is 
only beginning to dawn on the human eye and is yet barely discernible -
it is a task seen only by those who have understood that so far we have 
incorporated only our errors and that all of our consciousness refers to 
errors! 
12 
On the aim of science. - What? The final aim of science should be to give 
man as much pleasure and as little displeasure as possible? But what if 
6 The usual German word for 'consciousness' is BewufJtsein (literally 'being-in-a-state-of-aware­
ness-of') and this is the term Nietzsche uses in the title of this paragraph. He then however shifts 
to the much more unusual word BewujJtheit, which has an ending (heit) that usually signifies an 
abstract property, and argues against the view that having such a property is something 
fundamental or especially important to humans. 
7 See I/iad1u55 and xx.30, 336. 
37 

The Cay Science 
pleasure and displeasure are so intertwined that whoever wants as much 
as possible of one must also have as much as possible of the other - that 
whoever wants to learn to 'jubilate up to the heavens' must also be 
prepared for 'grief unto death'? 8 And that may well be the way things 
are! At least the Stoics believed that this is how things are, and they were 
consistent when they also desired as little pleasure as possible in order to 
derive as little pain as possible from life (by using the saying 'The 
virtuous man is the happiest man',9 they had both a school slogan for the 
masses and a fine casuistic delicacy for the refined). Even today you still 
have the choice: either as little displeasure as possible, in short, lack of pain 
- and socialists and politicians of all parties fundamentally have no right 
to promise their people any more than that - or as much displeasure as 
possible as the price for the growth of a bounty of refined pleasures and 
joys that hitherto have seldom been tasted. Should you decide on the 
former, i.e. if you want to decrease and diminish people's susceptibility 
to pain, you also have to decrease and diminish their capacity for joy. 
With science one can actually promote either of these goals! So far it may 
still be better known for its power to deprive man of his joys and make 
him colder, more statue-like, more stoic. But it might yet be found to be 
the great giver of pain! - And then its counterforce might at the same time 
be found: its immense capacity for letting new galaxies of joy flare up! 
13 
On the doctrine of the feeling of power. - Benefiting and hurting others are 
ways of exercising one's power over them - that is all one wants in such 
cases! We hurt those to whom we need to make our power perceptible, 
for pain is a much more sensitive means to that end than pleasure: pain 
always asks for the cause, while pleasure is inclined to stop with itself 
and not look back. We benefit and show benevolence toward those who 
already depend on us in some way (that is, who are used to thinking of 
us as their causes); we want to increase their power because we thus 
increase our own, or we want to show them the advantage of being in 
our power - that way, they will be more satisfied with their situation and 
8 Quotation from Aet 111, Scene 2 of Goethe's Egmont, frequently cited in Germany as an 
archetypal description of the Romantic personality. 
9 This doctrine, originally defended by Socrates (see Xenophon, Memorabilia 111.5), was a central 
part of Stoic ethics (see A. A. Long and D. Sedley, The Hellenistic Philosophers [Cambridge 
University Press, 1987], esp. vol. 1, pp. 344-436, and esp. pp. 357-9). 

Book One 
more hostile towards and willing to fight against the enemies of our 
power. Whether in benefiting or hurting others we make sacrifices does 
not affect the ultimate value of our actions; even if we stake our lives, as 
martyrs do for their church, it is a sacrifice made for our desire for 
power or for the preservation of our feeling of power. He who feels 'I 
am in possession of the truth' - how many possessions does he not 
renounce in order to save this feeling! What would he not throw 
overboard in order to stay 'on top' - that is, above the others who lack 
'the truth'! The state in which we hurt others is certainly seldom as 
agreeable, in an unadulterated way, as that in which we benefit others; it 
is a sign that we are still lacking power, or it betrays a frustration in the 
face of this poverty; it brings new dangers and uncertainties to the 
power we do possess and clouds our horizon with the prospect of 
revenge, scorn, punishment, failure. Only to the most irritable and 
covetous adherents of the f eeling of power - to those for whom the sight 
of those who are already subjected (the objects of benevolence) is a 
burden and boredorn - might it be more pleasurable to imprint the seal 
of power on the reluctant. It depends on how one is accustomed to spice 
one's life; it is a matter of taste whether one prefers the slow or the 
sudden, the safe or the dangerous and daring increase in power - one 
always seeks this or that spice according to one's temperament. An easy 
prey is something contemptible for proud natures; they take delight 
only at the sight of unbroken persons who could become their enemies 
and at the sight of all possessions that are hard to come by; they are 
often hard towards someone who is suffering, for he is not worthy of 
their contention and pride - but they are the more obliging toward their 
equals, against whom it would be honourable to fight and struggle if the 
occasion should arise. Spurred by the good feeling of this perspective, 
the members of the knightly caste became accustomed to treating each 
others with exquisite courtesy. Compassion is the most agreeable feeling 
for those who have little pride and no prospect of great conquests; for 
them, easy prey - and that is what those who suffer are - is something 
enchanting. Compassion is praised as the virtue of prostitutes. 
14 
The things people ca!! love. - Greed and love: such different feelings 
these terms evoke! And yet it could be the same instinct, named twice: 
39 

The Cay Science 
once disparaged by those who already have, in whom the instinct has 
somewhat calmed down and who now fear for what they 'have'; the 
other time seen from the standpoint of the unsatisfied, the thirsty, and 
therefore glorified as 'good'. Our love of our neighbours - is it not a 
craving for new property? And likewise our love of knowledge, of truth, 
and altogether any craving for what is new? We slowly grow tired of the 
old, of what we safely possess, and we stretch out our bands again; even 
the most beautiful landscape is no longer sure of our love after we have 
lived in it for three months, and some more distant coast excites our 
greed: possession usually diminishes the possession. The pleasure we 
take in ourselves tries to preserve itself by time and again changing 
something new into ourselves - that is simply what possession means. To 
grow tired of a possession is to grow tired of ourselves. (One can also 
suffer from an excess - even the desire to throw away, to dole out, can 
take on the honorary name 'love'.) When we see someone suffering, we 
like to use this opportunity to take possession of him; that is for example 
what those who become his benefactors and those who have compassion 
for him do, and they call the lust for new possessions that is awakened in 
them 'love'; and their delight is like that aroused by the prospect of a 
new conquest. Sexual love, however, is what most clearly reveals itself as 
a craving for new property: the lover wants unconditional and sole 
possession of the longed-for person; he wants a power over her soul as 
unconditional as his power over her body; he wants to be the only 
beloved, to live and to rule in the other soul as that which is supreme 
and most desirable. If one considers that this means excluding the whole 
world from a precious good, from joy and enjoyment; if one considers 
that the lover aims at the impoverishment and deprivation of all the 
competitors and would like to become the dragon guarding his golden 
board as the most inconsiderate and selfish of all 'conquerors' and 
exploiters; if one considers, finally, that to the lover himself the rest of 
the world appears indifferent, pale, and worthless and that he is 
prepared to make any sacrifice, upset any arder, subordinate any other 
interest; then one is indeed amazed that this wild greed and injustice of 
sexual love has been as glorified and deified as it has in all ages - yes, 
that this love has furnished the concept of love as the opposite of egoism 
when it may in faet be the most candid expression of egoism. Here is it 
evidently the have-nots and the yearning ones who have formed 
linguistic usage - there have probably always been too many of them. 
40 

Book One 
Those who were granted much possession and satiety in this area must 
occasionally have made some casual remark about 'the raging demon', as 
did that most charming and beloved of all Athenians, Sophocles: 10 but 
Eros always laughed at such blasphemers; they were always precisely his 
greatest darlings. Here and there on earth there is probably a kind of 
continuation of love in which this greedy desire of two people for each 
other gives way to a new desire and greed, a shared higher thirst for an 
ideal above them. But who knows such love? Who has experienced it? 
lts true name isfriendship. 
15 
From a distance. - This mountain makes the entire region it dominates 
attractive and significant in every way; having said this to ourselves for 
the hundredth time, we are so unreasonably and thankfully disposed 
toward it that we suppose that it, the bestower of such delight, must 
itself be the most delightful thing in the region - and so we climb it and 
are disappointed. Suddenly the mountain itself and the entire landscape 
around us, beneath us, seem to have lost their magic; we had forgotten 
that certain types of greatness, like certain types of goodness, want to be 
beheld only from a distance and always from below, not from above -
only thus do they have an effect. Perhaps you know people near you who 
ought to view themselves only from a distance in order to find 
themselves at all tolerable or attractive and invigorating; self-knowledge 
is something they should be advised against. 
Over the footbridge. - When dealing with people who are bashful about 
their f eelings, one has to be able to dissimulate; they feel a sudden 
hatred towards anyone who catches them in a tender or enthusiastic or 
elevated feeling, as if he had seen their secrets. If one wants to do them 
good in such moments, one should make them laugh or utter some cold, 
jocular sarcasm: then their feeling freezes and they regain power over 
themselves. But I am giving the moral before the story. There was a 
time in our lives when we were so close that nothing seemed to obstruer 
10 See Plato, Republic 329c. 
41 

The Cay Science 
our friendship and brotherhood, and only a small footbridge separated 
us. Just as you were about to step on it, I asked you: 'Do you want to 
cross the footbridge to me?' - But then you didn't want to any more; 
and when I asked again, you were silent. Since then, mountains and 
torrential rivers, and everything which separates and alienates, have 
been cast between us, and even if we wanted to reach each other, we 
couldn't anymore! But when you think of that little footbridge now, you 
have no words anymore - only sobs and bewilderment. 
Finding a motive for one 's poverty. - There is clearly no trick that enables 
us to turn a poor virtue into a rich and overflowing one, but we can 
surely reinterpret its poverty nicely into a necessity, so that its sight no 
longer offends us and we no longer make reproachful faces at fate on its 
account. That is what the wise gardener does when he places the poor 
little stream in his garden in the arms of a nymph and thus finds a 
motive for its poverty: and who wouldn't need nymphs as he does? 
Ancient pride. - The specific hue which nobility had in the ancient world 
is absent in ours because the ancient slave is absent from our sensibility. 
A Greek of noble descent found such immense intermediate stages and 
such a distance between his own height and that ultimate baseness that 
he could barely see the slave clearly any more: not even Plato could 
really see him. It is different with us, accustomed as we are to the 
doctrine of human equality, if not also to equality itself. A creature who 
is not at its own disposal and who lacks leisure is by no means something 
despicable to us on that account; per haps each of us possesses too much 
of such slavishness in accordance with the conditions of our social order 
and activity, which are utterly different from those of the ancients. The 
Greek philosopher went through life feeling secretly that there were far 
more slaves than one might think - namely, that everyone who was not a 
philosopher was a slave; 11 his pride overflowed when he considered that 
even the mightiest men on earth might be his slaves. This pride, too, is 
11 Stoic doctrine; see e.g. Diogenes Laertius 7.121-2 (in Long and Sedley, Philosophers, vol. I 
p. 431) and Cicero, De stoicorum paradoxiis, Paradoxon V. 
42 

Book One 
foreign and impossible for us; not even metaphorically does the word 
'slave' possess for us its full force. 
19 
Evi/. - Examine the lives of the hest and the most fruitful people and 
peoples and ask yourselves whether a tree which is supposed to grow to 
a proud height could do without bad weather and storms: whether 
misfortune and exernal resistance, whether any kinds ofhatred, jealousy, 
stubbornness, mistrust, hardness, greed, and violence do not belong to 
the favourable conditions without which any great growth even of virtue 
is scarcely possible? The poison from which the weaker nature perishes 
strengthens the strong man - and he does not call it poison. 
20 
The dignity of foolishness. - A few millennia further along the course set 
by the last century - and everything men do will display the highest 
prudence: but just that way prudence will lose all its dignity. Then it 
will, to be sure, be necessary to be prudent, but it will also be so 
commonplace and vulgar that even a moderately aristocratic taste will 
experience this necessity as a vulgarity. And just as a tyranny of truth 
and science could increase esteem for the lie, a tyranny of prudence 
could spur a new kind of nobility. To be noble might then come to 
mean: to entertain follies. 
21 
To the teachers of selfiessness. - A person's virtues are called good with 
respect to their presumed effects not on him but on us and society - the 
praise of virtues has always been far from 'selfless', far from 'unegoistic'! 
For otherwise one would have had to recognize that the virtues (such as 
diligence, obedience, chastity, piety, justice) are mostly harmful to their 
possessors, being drives which dominate them all too violently and 
covetously and in no way let reason keep them in balance with the other 
drives. When you have a virtue - areal, complete virtue (and not just a 
small drive towards some virtue) - you are its victim! But the neighbour 
praises your virtue precisely on that account! One praises the diligent 
43 

The Cay Science 
even if he should harm his vision or the originality and freshness of his 
spirit; one honours and feels sorry for the youth who has 'worked 
himself to death' because one thinks: 'For society as a whole the loss of 
even the best individual is merely a small sacrifice! Too bad that the 
sacrifice is necessary! It would surely be much worse though if the 
individual had thought otherwise and considered his own preservation 
and development more important than his work in the service of 
society!' And so one feels sorry for this youth, not for his own sake but 
because a devoted tool, ruthless towards itself - a so-called 'good man' -
has been lost to society through his death. Perhaps one also asks 
whether it would not have been more useful to society if he had worked 
in a way that was less negligent towards himself and had preserved 
himself longer - yes, one admits that there would have been some 
advantage in that, but considers this other advantage to be greater and 
more last; that a sacrifice was made and the ethos of the sacrificial animal 
once again vindicated/or all to see. What is, therefore, first really praised 
when virtues are praised is their instrumental nature and then the blind 
drive in every virtue that refuses to be held in check by the overall 
advantage of the individual - in short, the unreason in virtue that leads 
the individual to allow himself to be transformed into a mere function 
of the whole. The praise of virtues is the praise of something privately 
harmful - the praise of drives which deprive a human being of his 
noblest selfishness and of the strength for the highest form of self­
protection. For the sake of inculcating and incorporating virtuous habits 
into people, to be sure, one emphasizes various effects of virtue that 
make virtue and private advantage appear as sisters - and there is in faet 
such a relationship! Blindly raging industriousness, for example - this 
typical virtue of an instrument - is represented as the road to riches and 
honour and as the best poison for curing boredorn and the passions; but 
one keeps silent about its <langer, its extreme dangerousness. That is 
how education always proceeds: it tries to condition the individual 
through various attractions and advantages to adopt a way of thinking 
and behaving that, when it has become habit, drive and passion, will 
rule in him and over him against his ultimate advantage but 'for the 
common good'. How often I see it: that blindly raging industriousness 
brings riches and honour but at the same time deprives the organs of 
refinement that make it possible to enjoy the riches and honour; also, 
that this chief antidote to boredorn and to the passions at the same time 
44 

Book One 
dulls the senses and makes the spirit resistant to new attractions. (The 
most industrious age - our own - doesn't know how to make anything 
of all its industriousness and money except still more money and still 
more industriousness; for more genius is required to spend than to 
acquire! - Well, we'll still have our 'grandchildren'!) If education is 
successful, each virtue of the individual is a public utility and a private 
disadvantage with respect to the highest private end - probably invol­
ving some deterioration of the spirit and the senses or even a premature 
demise: consider from this standpoint the virtues of obedience, chastity, 
piety, and justice. The praise of the selfless, the self-sacrificing, the 
virtuous - that is, of the person who does not apply his entire strength 
and reason to his own preservation, development, elevation, promotion, 
and expansion of power, but rather lives, as regards himself, modestly 
and throughtlessly, maybe even with indifference and irony - this praise 
is certainly not horn out of the spirit of selflessness! The 'neighbour' 
praises selflessness because it brings him advantages! If the neighbour 
himself thought 'selflessly', he would reject this decrease in strength, 
this harm for his benefit; he would work against the development of 
such inclinations, and above all he would affirm his selflessness by not 
calling it good! Hereby we hint at the fundamental contradiction in the 
morality that is very much honoured just now: the motives to this 
morality stand in opposition to its principiel What this morality wants to 
use as its proof, it refutes with its criterion of what is moral! In order 
not to contradict itself, the command 'You shall renounce yourself and 
sacrifice yourself' could be proclaimed only by a being which thereby 
renounced its own advantage and perhaps, through the demanded 
sacrifice of the individual, brought about its own destruction. But as 
soon as the neighbour ( or society) recommends altruism for the sake of 
its utility, it is using the directly opposed principle, 'You shall seek your 
advantage even at the expense of everything else' - and thus one 
preaches, in the same breath, a 'Thou shalt' and a 'Thou shalt not'! 
22 
L 'ordre du jour pour le roi. 12 - The day begins: let us begin to organize 
for this day the business and festivities of our most gracious master who 
12 'The king's schedule for the day' 
45 

The Cay Science 
is still deigning to repose. His majesty has bad weather today: we shall 
be careful not to call it bad; we shall not speak of the weather - but we 
shall be a bit more ceremonious about the business than would 
otherwise be necessary and a bit more festive about the f estivities. His 
majesty may even be ill: at breakfast we shall present the latest good 
news of last evening, the arrival of Mr Montaigne, who jokes so 
agreeably about his illness; he's suffering from a stone. 13 We shall 
receive a few persons (persons! What that puffed-up old frog who will 
be among them would say if he heard this word! 'I am nota person', he 
would say, 'but always the matter itself' 14) - and this reception will take 
longer than anyone finds agreeable: that is reason enough to tell about 
the poet who wrote on his door, 'Whoever enters here will pay me an 
honour; whoever does not - a pleasure.' 15 Truly a polite way to express 
a rudeness! And perhaps this poet is for his part quite right in being 
rude: they say his poems are better than their maker. Well, then let him 
write many more and withdraw himself from the world as much as 
possible - that is af ter all the meaning of his civil incivility! Conversely, 
a prince is always worth more than his 'verse', even if - but what are we 
doing? We are gossiping and the whole court thinks we are already 
working and racking our brains - one sees no light earlier than the one 
burning in our window. Listen! Wasn't that the bell? Damn! The day 
and the dance are beginning and we don't know the programmel So we 
have to improvise - the whole world improvises its day. Let's just do 
today as the whole world does! And there my strange morning dream 
vanished, probably the victim of the hard strokes of the tower bell, 
which just announced the fifth hour with all of its customary impor­
tance. It seems to me that this time the god of dreams wanted to poke 
fun at my habit of starting the day by organizing it and making it 
tolerable to myself, and it may well be that I have often done this in too 
formal and princelike a manner. 
13 French moralist (1533-92) who discusses the pains (and pleasures) of his affiiction in his essay 
'Of Experience' 
14 Perhaps a reference to Montaigne's letter 'To the Reader', printed as introduction to his Essays 
15 In his notebook Nietzsche writes that this refers to 'Augier'; probably Emile Augier (1820-89), 
minor French dramatist who wrote on classical topics. 

Book One 
23 
The signs of corruption. - Consider the following signs of those states of 
society that are necessary from time to time and that are designated by 
the word 'corruption'. As soon as corruption sets in anywhere, a 
colourful superstition takes over, and the previous common faith of a 
people becomes pale and powerless against it: for supersitition is free­
spiritedness of the second rank - whoever succumbs to it selects certain 
forms and formulas that appeal to him and allows himself some freedom 
of choice. The superstitious person is always, compared to the religious 
person, much more of a 'person', and a superstitious society will be one 
in which there are many individuals and much delight in individuality. 
From this perspective, superstition always appears as progress against 
faith and as a sign that the intellect is becoming more independent and 
demanding its rights. Those who then complain about corruption are 
the devotees of the old religion and religiosity - until now they have also 
determined linguistic usage and given superstition a bad name even 
among the freest spirits. Let us realize that it is actually a symptom of 
enlightenment. Secondly, a society in which corruption spreads is 
accused of laxity; and it is obvious that the esteem of war and the 
pleasure in war diminish, while the comforts of life are now desired just 
as ardently as were warlike and athletic honours formerly. What is 
usually overlooked, however, is that the ancient civil energy and passion, 
which received a magnificent visibility through war and competitive 
games, has now transformed itself into countless private passions and 
has merely become less visible; indeed, in times of 'corruption' the 
power and force of a people's expended energies are probably greater 
than ever, and the individual spends them on a lavish scale which he 
could not previously have afforded - when he was not yet rich enough! 
And thus it is precisely in times of 'laxness' that tragedy runs through 
the houses and streets, that great love and great hatred are bom and the 
flame of knowledge blazes up into the sky. Thirdly, it is usually said to 
the credit of such societies, as if one wanted to compensate for the 
reproaches of superstition and laxness, that they are milder and that 
cruelty declines drastically in comparison to the older, stronger, more 
devout age. But this praise I cannot endorse any more than the 
reproaches: I concede only that cruelty now re.fines itself and that its 
older forms henceforth offend taste; but wounding and torturing with 
47 

The Cay Science 
word and eye reaches its highest cultivation in times of corruption - it is 
now alone that malice and the delight in malice are bom. People who 
live in an age of corruption are witty and slanderous; they know that 
there are other kinds of murder than by dagger or assault; they also 
know that whatever is well said is believed. Fourthly, when 'morals 
decay', those beings emerge for the first time who are called tyrants: 
they are the precursors and as it were the precociousfirstling instances of 
individuals. Justa little bit longer and this fruit of fruits hangs ripe and 
yellow on the tree of a people - and this tree existed only for the sake of 
this fruit! Once decay has reached its peak along with the struggle of all 
sorts of tyrants, the Caesar always appears, the final tyrant who puts an 
end to the weary wrestling for sole rule by putting weariness to work for 
himself. In his age the individual is usually ripest and culture is 
therefore at its highest and most fruitful stage, but not for the sake of 
him and not through him, though those of the highest culture like to 
flatter their Caesar by claiming to be his work. In truth they need peace 
from without because they have enough unrest and work within. In 
these times, bribery and treason are at their peak, for the love of the 
newly discovered ego is now much mightier than the love of the old, 
used-up, touted-to-death 'fatherland', and the need to secure oneself 
from the terrible ups and downs of luck opens even noble hands as soon 
as someone who is mighty and wealthy shows himself willing to pour 
gold into them. There is now so very little secure future; one lives for 
today: a state of soul that makes an easy game for all seducers, for one 
allows oneself to be seduced and bribed only 'for today' and reserves the 
future and virtue for oneself! As is well known the individuals, these 
true 'in-and-for-themselves', care more about the moment than do their 
opposites, the herd people, for they consider themselves just as unpre­
dictable as the future. They also like to join up with people of violence 
because they think themselves capable of actions and information which 
the common people would neither understand nor forgive, while the 
tyrant or Caesar would understand the rights of the individual even in 
his excesses and has an interest in advocating and even abetting a holder 
private morality. For he thinks of himself and wants his self to be 
thought of as Napoleon once expressed it in his classic manner : 'I have 
the right to answer all charges against me with an eternal "That isme." 
I am apart from all the world and accept conditions from no one. I want 
people to submit even to my fantasies and to find it natural when I yield 

Book One 
to this or that distraction.' That is what Napoleon once replied to his 
wife when she had reasons to question her husband's marital fidelity.16 
Times of corruption are those in which the apples fall from the tree: I 
mean the individuals, the seed-bearers of the future, the spiritual 
colonizers and shapers of new states and communities. Corruption is 
just a rude word for the autumn of a people. 
24 
Dijferent forms of dissatisfaction. - The weak and, as it were, feminine 
discontented types are those who are innovative at making life more 
beautiful and profound; the strong discontents - the men among them, 
to stick with the metaphor - are innovative at making it better and safer. 
The former show their weakness and femininity by gladly letting 
themselves be deceived from time to time and occasionally resting 
content with a bit of intoxication and gushing enthusiasm, though they 
can never be satisfied entirely and suffer from the incurability of their 
dissatisfaction; they are also the promoters of all who know how to 
procure opiates and narcotic consolations, and consequently they resent 
those who esteem physicians above priests - thus they assure the 
continuance of real distress! Had there not been a surplus of these 
discontents in Europe since the middle ages, the celebrated European 
capacity for constant transformation might never have developed, for the 
demands of the strong discontents are too crude and basically too 
undemanding not eventually to be brought to a final rest. China, for 
example, is a country where large-scale discontentment and the capacity 
for change became extinct centuries ago; and in Europe too the socialists 
and state idolaters, with their measures for making life better and safer, 
might easily establish Chinese conditions and a Chinese 'happiness', 
provided they are first able to extirpate that sicklier, more tender, more 
feminine discontentment and romanticism that is for the moment still 
superabundant here. Europe is a patient who owes the utmost gratitude 
to his incurability and to the perpetual changes in his affliction: these 
incessantly new conditions, these no less incessantly new dangers, pains, 
and modes of information have finally generated an intellectual 
16 Reported in Mimoires de Madame de Rimusat (3 vols., Paris, 1879-80), vol. 1, pp. 114f, a copy of 
which Nietzsche had in his library 
49 

The Cay Science 
irritability that approximates genius and that is in any case the mother 
of all genius. 
25 
Not predestined for knowledge. - There is a stupid humility that is by no 
means rare, and those afflicted with it are altogether unfit to become 
votaries of knowledge. For as soon as a person of this type perceives 
something striking, he turns on his heel, as it were, and says to himself, 
'You have made a mistake! Where were your senses? This cannot be the 
truth!' And then, instead of looking and listening more keenly again, he 
runs away, as if intimidated, from the striking thing and tries to shake it 
from his mind as fast as possible. For his inner canon says: 'I want to see 
nothing that contradicts the prevalent opinion. Arn I made to <liseover 
new truths? There are already too many old ones.' 
26 
What is li.fe?- Life - that is: continually shedding something that wants 
to die; Life - that is: being cruel and inexorable against anything that is 
growing weak and old in us, and not just in us. Life - therefore means: 
being devoid of respect for the dying, the wretched, the aged? Always 
being a murderer? And yet old Moses said: 'Thou shalt not kill.' 17 
27 
The renouncer. - What does the renouncer do? He strives for a higher 
world, he wants to fly further and higher than all affirmers - he throws 
away much that would encumber his flight, including some things that 
are not valueless, not disagreeable to him: he sacrifices it to his desire for 
the heights. This sacrificing, this throwing away, is now precisely what 
alone becomes visible in him and leads people to call him the renouncer, 
and thus he stands before us, shrouded in his hood as if he were the soul 
of a hairshirt. But he is quite satisfied with the impression that he makes 
on us: he wants to conceal from us his desire, his pride, his intention to 
soar beyond us. Yes, he is eleverer than we thought, and so polite 
17 Moses was the supposed author of the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible which 
include, in Exodus, 20, the Ten Commandments. 
50 

Book One 
towards us - this affirmer! For he is just as we are even m his 
renunciation. 
Harming with what is best in oneself. - At times our strengths propel us 
so far ahead that we can no longer stand our weaknesses and perish from 
them. We may even foresee this outcome and still will have it no other 
way. Thus we become hard against that within us that wants to be 
spared, and our greatness is also our mercilessness. Such an experience, 
for which we must in the end pay with our lives, is a parable for the 
whole effect of great human beings on others and on their age: precisely 
with what is hest in them, with what only they can do, they destroy 
many who are weak, insecure, in the process of becoming, of willing, 
and thus they are harmful. It can even happen that, all in all, they are 
harmful only because what is hest in them is accepted and as it were 
imbibed only by those whom it affects like an overly potent drink: they 
lose their mind and their selfishness; they become so intoxicated that 
they are bound to break their limbs on all the wrong paths down which 
their intoxication drives them. 
29 
The add-on-liars. - When people in France started to fight the 
Aristotelian unities 18 and others consequently also started to defend 
them, one could see again something that is so often apparent but that 
people are loath to see: one lied to oneself, inventing reasons for these 
laws, simply to avoid admitting that one had become used to them and 
would no longer have it any other way. And that is what one does, and 
has always done, within every prevailing morality and religion: the 
reasons and intents behind habits are invented only when some people 
start attacking the habits and asking for reasons and intents. Here we 
have the great dishonesty of conservatives of all times - they are the 
add-on-liars. 
18 In seventeenth-century France aestheticians (mis)read Aristotle (see his Poetics, esp. chapter 8 
[1451a.16-35]) as requiring that a tragedy exhibit unity oftime, place, and plot. 
51 

The Cay Science 
30 
The comedy of the famous. - Famous men who need their farne, e.g. all 
politicians, never choose allies and friends without ulterior motives: 
from one they want a piece of the splendour and reflected splendour of 
his virtue; from another the fear-inspiring aspects of certain dubious 
qualities that everyone knows him to have; from another they steal the 
reputation of his idleness, his lying in the sun, because it serves their 
own ends to appear inattentive and sluggish at times - it conceals the 
faet that they actually lie in wait; now they need a visionary around; now 
an expert; now a thinker; now a pedant, as if he were their present self; 
but just as quickly they don't need them any more! And so the 
surroundings and exteriors of famous men die off continually, even 
while everything seems to be pushing to get into these surroundings and 
lend them their character; in this, they are like big cities. Their 
reputation is continually changing, like their character, for their chan­
ging methods demand these changes and push forward now this, now 
that real or fictitious characteristic onto the stage. Their friends and 
allies belong, as I said, to these stage properties. What they want, 
however, must stand all the much more firmly and unshakeably and be 
splendidly seen from afar; and this, too, sometimes requires its comedy 
and its theatrics. 
31 
Trade and nobility. - Buying and selling are common by now, like the art 
of reading and writing; everyone has practised it, even if he is not a 
tradesman, and gets more practice at this technique every day - just as 
formerly, in the age of a more savage humanity, everyone was a hunter 
and practised the technique of hunting every day. In that age, hunting 
was common; but eventually it became a privilege and thereby lost its 
everyday and common character - because it stopped being necessary 
and became a thing of moods and luxury. The same thing could happen 
to buying and selling one day. One can imagine social conditions in 
which there is no buying and selling and in which this technique 
gradually becomes unnecessary. Perhaps some individuals who are not 
as subject to the laws of the general condition will then give themselves 
permission to buy and_ sell as a luxury of sentiment. Only then would 
52 

Book One 
trade become something exquisite, and the noble might enjoy trade as 
much as they hitherto enjoyed war and politics, while conversely the 
assessment of politics could have changed completely. Even now it is 
ceasing to be the art of the nobleman, and it is quite possible that some 
day one will find it so base that, along with all political literature and 
journalism, one classifies it as a 'prostitution of the spirit'. 
32 
Undesired disciples. - 'What can I do with these two young men!' cried 
an irritated philosopher who 'corrupted' the youth as Socrates once had 
done;19 they are unwelcome students. This one can't say 'no' and the 
other one says 'half and half' about everything. If they adopted my 
doctrine, the first would suffer too much, for my way of thinking 
requires a warlike soul, a desire to hurt, a delight in saying no, a hard 
skin; he would languish from open and internal wounds. And the other 
would strike a compromise with everything he represents and thereby 
make it into a mediocrity - such a disciple I wish on my enemies. 
33 
Outside the lecture-room. - 'In order to prove to you that man is 
fundamentally a good-natured animal, I would remind you of how 
credulous he has been for so long. Only now, quite late and after 
tremendous self-conquest, has he become a distrustful animal. Yes, man 
is now more evil than ever.' I do not understand this: why should man 
be more distrustful and evil now? 'Because he now has a science - needs 
a science.' 
34 
Historia abscondita.20 - Every great human being exerts a retroactive 
force: for his sake all of his tory is put on the scale again, and a thousand 
secrets of the past crawl out of their hiding places - into his sunshine. 
There is no telling what may yet become a part of history. Maybe the 
19 One of the charges on which Socrates was condemned to death was that of 'corrupting the 
youth'; see Plato, Apology 24 b-c. 
20 'hidden history' 
53 

The Cay Science 
past is still essentially undiscovered! So many retroactive forces are still 
needed! 
35 
Heresy and witchcraft. - To think otherwise than is customary is much 
less the effect of a superior intellect than of strong, evil inclinations -
detaching, isolating, defiant, gloating, and malicious inclinations. 
Heresy is the adjunct of witchcraft and surely no more harmless and 
least of all anything venerable. Heretics and witches are two species of 
evil people; what they have in common is that they also feel evil but are 
impelled by an unconquerable lust to harm what is prevailing (people or 
opinions). The Reformation, which was a kind of redoubling of the 
medieval spirit at a time when it was no longer accompanied by a good 
conscience, produced both in the greatest abundance. 
Last words. - One will recall that the emperor Augustus, that frightful 
man who had as much self-control and who could be as silent as any 
wise Socrates, became indiscreet against himself with his last words: he 
let his mask fall for the first time when he made it clear that he had 
worn a mask and acted a comedy - he had played the father of the 
fatherland and the wisdom on the throne well enough to create the 
proper illusion! Plaudite amici, comoedia finita est/21 The thought of 
the dying Nero - qua/is artifex pereo/22 - was also the thought of the 
dying Augustus: actor's vanity! Actor's prolixity! And truly the opposite 
of the dying Socrates!23 But Tiberius <lied silently, this most tormented 
of all self-tormentors - he was genuine and no actor! What might have 
passed through his mind at the end? Maybe this: 'Life - that is a long 
death. What a fool I was to shorten so many lives! Was I made to be a 
benefactor? I should have given them eternal lift: that way, I could have 
seen them die forever. That's why I had such good eyes: qua/is spectator 
21 'Father of the Fatherland' was an honorary title bestowed by the Roman Senate on the emperor 
Augustus. In his biography (chapter 99) Suetonius reports that these Latin words (= 'Applaud, 
my friends, the comedy is over!') were among the last Augustus spoke on his deathbed. 
22 'I die, what a loss to art!' (as reported by Suetonius, Lije ofNero, chapter 49) 
23 Socrates insisted that a decorous silence be preserved while he was being executed; see Plato, 
Phaedo I 17c-e, but see below, § 340, p. 193. 
54 

Book One 
pereo!'24 When after a lang death-struggle he seemed to recover his 
strength, it was considered advisable to smother him with pillows - he 
<lied a double death. 25 
37 
Because of three errors. - One has promoted science during the last 
centuries partly because it was through science that one hoped hest to 
understand God's goodness and wisdom - the main motive in the soul 
ofthe great Englishmen (such as Newton); 26 partly because one believed 
in the absolute usefulness of knowledge, especially in the most intimate 
affiliation between morality, knowledge, and happiness - the main 
motive in the soul of the French (such as Voltaire);27 and partly because 
one believed that in science one had and loved something selfless, 
harmless, self-sufficient, and truly innocent in which the evil drives of 
humanity had no part at all - the main motive in the soul of Spinoza, 28 
who felt di vine in attaining knowledge - in sum, because of three errors. 
The explosive ones. - When one considers how the energy of young men 
needs to explode, one is not surprised to see them decide so unsubtly 
and so unselectively for this or that cause: what thrills them is the sight 
of the zeal surrounding a cause and, so to speak, the sight of the 
burning match - not the cause itsel[ The subtler seducers therefore 
know how to create in them the expectation of an explosion and to 
disregard justifying their cause: reasons are not the way to win over 
these powder kegs! 
39 
Changed taste. - Change in common taste is more important than that 
in opinions; opinions along with proofs, refutations, and the whole 
24 'I die, but what a good observer I was!' 
25 Tiberius' end is described in Suetonius, Lift of Tiberius (chapter 73) and in Tacitus, Annals 
v1.50. 
26 English physicist and mathematician ( 1643- 1727) 
27 Paradigmatic French rationalist ofthe Enlightenment (1694-1778) 
28 Jewish philosopher who lived most ofhis life in Amsterdam (1632-77) 
55 

The Cay Science 
intellectual masquerade are only symptoms of a changed taste and most 
certainly not what they are so often taken to be, its causes. How does 
common taste change? Through individuals - powerful, influential, and 
without any sense of shame - who announce and tyrannically enforce 
their hoc est ridiculum, hoc est absurdum,29 i.e. the judgement of their taste 
and disgust: thus they put many under pressure, which gradually turns 
into a habit among even more and finally becomes a need of everyone. 
The reason why these individuals sense and 'taste' differently is usually 
found in a peculiarity of their lifestyle, nutrition, digestion, maybe a 
deficit or excess of inorganic salts in their blood and brains - in short, in 
their physis:30 they have the courage to own up to their physis and to 
heed its demands down to its subtlest tones. Their aesthetic and moral 
judgements are such 'subtlest tones' of the physis. 
40 
On the lack of noble style. - Soldiers and leaders still have a far higher 
relation to one another than do workers and employers. So far at least, 
all cultures with a military basis are still high above so-called industrial 
culture: the latter in its present form is altogether the most vulgar form 
of existence that has ever been. Here it is simply the law of need 
operating: one wants to live and has to sell oneself, but one despises 
those who exploit this need and buy the worker. It is strange that 
submission to powerful, frightening, yes, terrifying persons, to tyrants 
and generals, is experienced to be not nearly as distressing as this 
submission to unknown and uninteresting persons, which is what all the 
greats of industry are: the worker usually sees in the employer only a 
cunning, bloodsucking dog of a man who speculates on all distress and 
whose name, figure, manner, and reputation are completely indifferent 
to him. So far the manufacturers and large-scale commercial entrepre­
neurs have apparently been much too lacking in all the manners and 
signs of higher race that alone enable a person to become interesting; if 
they had the refinement of noble breeding in their eye and gesture, there 
might not be any socialism of the masses. For the masses are basically 
prepared to submit to any kind of slavery provided that the superiors 
constantly legitimize themselves as higher, as born to command -
29 'This is ridiculous, this is absurd. ' 
30 Greek for 'nature' 

Book One 
through refined demeanour! The commonest man senses that refine­
ment cannot be improvised and that one has to honour in it the fruit of 
long ages - but the absence of the higher demeanour and the notorious 
manufacturer's vulgarity with ruddy, plump hands give him the idea 
that it is only accident and luck that elevated one above the other in this 
case: well, then, he infers, let us try accident and luck! Let us throw the 
dice! - and socialism begins. 
Against remorse. - The thinker sees his own actions as experiments and 
questions, as seeking explanations of something: to him, success and 
failure are primarily answers. To be vexed or even to feel remorse 
because something goes wrong - he leaves that to those who aet because 
they were ordered to do so and who expect a beating when his gracious 
lordship is not pleased with the result. 
42 
Work and boredom. - Seeking work for the sake of wages - in this, nearly 
all people in civilized countries are alike; to all of them, work is just a 
means and not itself the end, which is why they are unrefined in their 
choice of work, provided it yields an ample reward. Now there are rare 
individuals who would rather perish than work without taking pleasure 
in their work: they are choosy, hard to please, and have no use for ample 
rewards if the work is not itself the reward of rewards. To this rare 
breed belong artists and contemplative men of all kinds, but also men of 
leisure who spend their lives hunting, travelling, in love affairs, or on 
adventures. All of them want work and misery as long as it is joined 
with pleasure, and the heaviest, hardest work, if need be. Otherwise 
they are resolutely idle, even if it spells impoverishment, dishonour, and 
dan ger to life and limb. They do not f ear boredorn as much as work 
without pleasure; indeed, they need a lot of boredorn if their work is to 
succeed. For the thinker and for all inventive spirits, boredorn is that 
disagreeable 'lull' of the soul that precedes a happy voyage and cheerful 
winds; he has to endure it, must await its effect on him - precisely that 
is what lesser natures are totally unable to achieve! To fend off boredom 
at any price is vulgar, just as work without pleasure is vulgar. Perhaps 
57 

The Cay Science 
Asians are distinguished as above Europeans by their capacity for a 
longer, deeper calm; even their narcotics work slowly and require 
patience, in contrast to the revolting suddenness of the European 
poison, alcohol. 
43 
What the laws betray. - It is a grave error to study a people's penal code 
as if it were an expression of its character; the laws do not betray what a 
people is but rather what appears to it as foreign, strange, uncanny, 
outlandish. The laws concern the exceptions to the morality of custom 
(Sittlichkeit der Sitte) 31 , and the severest punishments are for things that 
accord with the customs of the neighbouring people. Thus the Waha­
nabis32 have only two mortal sins: having a god other than the Wahanabi 
god and - smoking (which they call 'the disgraceful way of drinking'). 
'And what about murder and adultery?' asked the Englishman, amazed, 
who found this out. 'God is gracious and merciful', the old chief 
replied. Thus the old Romans had the notion that a woman could 
commit only two mortal sins: adultery and - drinking wine. Old Cato 
thought that kissing among relatives had been made into a custom only 
in order to keep the women under control in this regard; a kiss meant, 
'Does she smell of wine?'33 Women caught with wine were actually put 
to death; and certainly not just because sometimes women under the 
influence of wine completely forgot how to say no; above all, the 
Romans feared the orgiastic and Dionysian cult which afflicted the 
women of southern Europe from time to time when wine was still new 
in Europe - feared it as a foreign monster that overthrew the basis of 
Roman sensibility; to them it seemed like a betrayal of Rome, like the 
embodiment of the foreign. 
31 Nietzsche here uses the expression Sittlichkeit der Sitte, and similar phrases occur elsewhere 
(e.g. in § 46, die Sitte der Sittlichkeit). Hegel had distinguished between Sittlichkeit, the ethical 
outlook embodied in a society's customary practice, and Moralitiit, an abstract, reflective, code 
such as that insisted upon in Kant's philosophy. It is unclear, but unlikely, that Nietzsche was 
aware of Hegel's own particular version of this distinction, but Nietzsche's formulations 
emphasize strongly the customary aspect of traditional ethical life. 
32 lslamic sect in central Arabia. The anecdote which follows is taken from William Gifford 
Palgrave's A Narrative of a Year's Journey through Central and Eastern Arabia I862- J863 
(translated into German in 1867-8). 
33 Reported in Plutarch's Quaestiones romanae, 6. 
58 

Book One 
44 
The supposed motives. - lmportant as it may be to know the motives from 
which humanity has acted so far, it might be even more essential to 
know the belief people had in this or that motive, i.e. what humanity has 
imagined and told itself to be the real lever of its conduct so far. For 
people's inner happiness and misery has come to them depending on 
their belief in this or that motive - not through the actual motives. The 
latter are of second-order interest. 
45 
Epicurus.34 - Yes, I am proud to experience Epicurus' character in a way 
unlike perhaps anyone else and to enjoy, in everything I hear and read of 
him, the happiness of the afternoon of antiquity: I see his eye gaze at a 
wide whitish sea, across shoreline rocks bathed in the sun, as large and 
small creatures play in its light, secure and calm like the light and his 
eye itself. Only someone who is continually suffering could invent such 
happiness - the happiness of an eye before which the sea of existence 
has grown still and which now cannot get enough of seeing the surface 
and this colourful, tender, quivering skin of the sea: never before has 
voluptuousness been so modest. 
Our amazement. - It is a deep and fundamental stroke of luck that 
science <liseovers things that stand up under examination and that 
furnish the basis, again and again, for further discoveries - after all, it 
could be otherwise! Indeed, we are so convinced of the uncertainty and 
the fantastical quality of our judgements and of the eternal change of 
human laws and concepts that it actually amazes us how well the results 
of science stand up! Formerly, one knew nothing of the changeableness 
of everything human; the habit of attachment to customary morality 
(Sitte der Sittlichkeit) sustained the faith that the entire inner life of 
34 Late fourth-century BC Athenian philosopher who held that pleasure (correctly understood) 
was the goal of human life. This paragraph is probably influenced by Lucretius, On the Nature 
ofThings, Bk. II, 1-61, which describes the effects to be expected from foliowing the Epicurean 
doctrine. 
59 

The Cay Science 
humanity was fastened to iron necessity with eternal damps; perhaps 
people then experienced a similarly voluptuous amazement when they 
told each other stories and fairy tales. The miraculous did a lot of good 
to those who at times grew weary of the rule and of eternity. To lose 
firm ground for once! To float! To err! To be mad! - that was part of the 
paradise and debauchery of former ages, whereas our bliss is like that of 
the shipwrecked man who has climbed ashore and is standing with both 
feet on the firm old earth - marvelling because it does not bob up and 
down. 
47 
On the suppression of the passions. - If one constantly forbids oneself the 
expression of the passions, as if that were something to be left for the 
'common', coarser, middle-class, peasant types - i.e. if one wants to 
suppress not the passions themselves but only their language and gesture 
- one still attains in addition what one did not desire: the suppression of 
the passions themselves, at least their weakening and alteration - the 
most instructive example being furnished by the court ofLouis XIV and 
everything that depended on it. The age thatfollowed, brought up in the 
suppression of expression, no longer had the passions themselves and 
had in their place a graceful, shallow, playful manner - an age marked by 
an incapacity for bad manners, so that even an insult was accepted and 
returned with obliging words. Perhaps the present age supplies the most 
notable counterpart: everywhere, in life and on the stage, and not the 
least in everything written, I see the delight in all the coarser outbursts 
and gestures of passion: what is demanded these days is a certain 
convention of the passionate - but not passion itself! Nevertheless, 
eventually passion itself will be reached this way, and our progeny will be 
genuinely savage and not just savage and unruly in demeanour. 
Knowledge of distress. - Perhaps nothing separates human beings or ages 
from each other more than the different degrees of their knowledge of 
distress - distress of the soul as well as of the body. Regarding the latter 
we moderns may well, in spite of our frailties and fragilities, be bunglers 
and dreamers owing to lack of ample first-hand experience, compared 
60 

Book One 
with an age of fear, the longest of all ages, when individuals had to 
protect themselves against violence and to that end had themselves to 
become men of violence. In those days, a man received ample training in 
bodily torments and deprivations and understood that even a certain 
cruelty towards himself, as a voluntary exercise in pain, was a necessary 
means of his preservation; in those days, ane trained one's surroundings 
to endure pain; in those days, ane gladly inflicted pain and saw the most 
terrible things of this kind happen to others without any other feeling 
than that of one's own safety. As regards the distress of the soul, 
however, I look at each person today to see whether he knows it through 
experience or description; whether he still considers it necessary to fake 
this knowledge, say, as a sign of refined cultivation, or whether at the 
bottom of his soul he no longer believes in great pains of the soul and 
reacts to its mention in much the same way as to the mention of great 
bodily sufferings, which make him think of his toothaches and stomach­
aches. But that is how most people seem to me to be these days. The 
general inexperience with both sorts of pain and the relative rarity of the 
sight of suffering individuals have an important consequence: pain is 
hated much more now than formerly; ane speaks much worse of it; 
indeed, ane can hardly endure the presence of pain as a thought and 
makes it a matter of conscience and a reproach against the whole of 
existence. The emergence of pessimistic philosophers is in no way the 
sign of great, terrible states of distress; rather, these question marks 
about the value of all life are made in times when the refinement and 
ease of existence make even the inevitable mosquito bites of the soul and 
the body seem much tao bloody and malicious, and the poverty of real 
experiences of pain makes ane tend to consider painful general ideas as 
already suffering of the highest rank. There is a recipe against pessi­
mistic philosophies and excessive sensitivity, things which seem to me to 
be the real 'distress of the present' - but this recipe may sound tao cruel 
and would itself be counted among the signs that lead people to judge, 
'existence is something evil'. Well, the recipe against this 'distress' is: 
distress. 
49 
Magnanimity and related things. - Those paradoxical phenomena, like 
the sudden coldness in the behaviour of the emotional person, or the 
61 

The Cay Science 
humour of the melancholy person, or above all magnanimity as a sudden 
renunciation of revenge or a satisfaction of envy, appear in people who 
have a powerful inner centrifugal force, in people of sudden satiety and 
sudden nausea. Their satisfactions are so quick and strong that they are 
immediately followed by weariness and aversion and a flight into the 
opposite taste: in this opposite, the cramp of feeling is resolved - in one 
person by sudden cold, in another by laughter, in a third by tears and 
self-sacrifice. The magnanimous person - at least the type of magnani­
mous person who has always made the strongest impression - strikes 
me as a person with a most extreme thirst for vengeance, who sees 
satisfaction nearby and drinks it down already in imagination so fully, 
thoroughly and to the last drop that a tremendous, quick nausea follows 
this quick excess and he now rises 'above himself', as they say, and 
forgives his enemy, indeed blesses and honours him. With this rape of 
himself, with this mockery of his drive for revenge he only gives in to 
the new drive which just now has become powerful in him (disgust), 
and he does so just as impatiently and excessively as just a moment ago 
he imaginatively anticipated and, as it were, exhausted his delight in 
revenge. Magnanimity has the same degree of egoism as revenge, only 
egoism of a different quality. 
50 
The argument from growing solitary. - The reproach of conscience is 
weak in even the most conscientious people compared to the feeling: 
'This or that is against the morals (die gute Sitte) of your society.' Even 
the strongest person still fe ars a cold look or a sneer on the face of those 
among whom and for whom he has been brought up. What is he really 
afraid of? Growing solitary! This is the argument that refutes even the 
hest arguments for a person or a cause. - Thus the herd instinct speaks 
out in us. 
51 
The sense of truth. - I approve of any form of scepticism to which I can 
reply, 'Let's try it!' But I want to hear nothing more about all the things 
and questions that don't admit of experiment. This is the limit of my 
'sense of truth'; for there, courage has lost its right. 
62 

Book One 
52 
What others know about us. - What we know about ourselves and 
remember is not as decisive to our life's happiness as it is believed to be. 
One day, what others know (or think they know) about us assails us -
and then we realize that that is more powerful. It is easier to deal with a 
bad conscience than a bad reputation. 
53 
Where the good begins. - At the point where the poor power of the eye is 
no longer able to see the evil drive as such, owing to its increasing 
subtlety, man posits the realm of goodness; and the feeling of now 
having stepped into the land of goodness excites all those impulses that 
had been threatened and limited by the evil drive, such as the feeling of 
security, of comfort, of benevolence. So: the duller the eye, the more 
extensive the good! Hence the eternal cheerfulness of the common 
people and of children! Hence the gloominess and grief - akin to a bad 
conscience - of the great thinkers! 
54 
The consciousness of appearance. - How wonderful and new and yet how 
fearful and ironic my new insight makes me feel towards all of existence! 
I have discovered for myself that the ancient humanity and animality, 
indeed the whole prehistory and past of all sentient being, continues 
within me to fabulate, to love, to hate, and to infer - I suddenly awoke in 
the middle of this dream, but only to the consciousness that I am 
dreaming and that I must go on dreaming lest I perish - as the 
sleepwalker has to go on dreaming in order to avoid falling down. What 
is 'appearance' to me now! Certainly not the opposite of some essence -
what could I say about any essence except name the predicates of its 
appearancel Certainly not a dead mask that one could put on an 
unknown x and probably also take off xl To me, appearance is the active 
and living itself, which goes so far in its self-mockery that it makes me 
feel that here there is appearance and a will-o' -the-wisp and a dance of 
spirits and nothing else - that among all these dreamers, even I, the 
'knower', am dancing my dance; that the one who comes to know is a 

The Cay Science 
means of prolonging the earthly dance and thus is one of the masters of 
ceremony of existence, and that the sublime consistency and interrelat­
edness of all knowledge may be and will be the highest means to sustain 
the universality of dreaming, the mutual comprehension of all dreamers, 
and thereby also the duration of the dream. 
55 
The ultimate noblemindedness. - So what makes a person 'noble'? 
Certainly not making sacrifices; even those burning with lust make 
sacrifices. Certainly not foliowing some passion, for there are contemp­
tible passions. Certainly not that one does something for others without 
selfishness: perhaps no one is more consistently selfish than the noble 
one. - Rather, the passion that overcomes the noble one is a singularity, 
and he fails to realize this: the use of a rare and singular standard and 
almost a madness; the f eeling of heat in things that feel cold to everyone 
else; a hitting upon values for which the scale has not yet been invented; 
a sacrifice on altars made for an unknown god; a courage without any 
desire for honours; a self-sufficiency that overflows and communicates 
to men and things. Hitherto, then, it was rarity and the unawareness of 
this rarity that made noble. Note, however, that by means of this 
standard everything usual, near, and indispensable, in short, that which 
most preserved the species, and in general the rule of humanity hitherto, 
was inequitably judged and on the whole slandered in favour of the 
exceptions. To become the advocate of the rule - that might be the 
ultimate form and refinement in which noblemindedness manifests 
itself on earth. 
56 
The desire for suffering. - When I think of the desire to do something, 
how it continually tickles and goads the millions of young Europeans 
who cannot endure boredorn and themselves, I realize that they must 
have a yearning to suff er something in order to make their suff ering a 
likely reason for action, for deeds. Neediness is needed! Hence the 
clamour of the politicians; hence the many false, fictitious, exaggerated 
'emergencies' of all kinds and the blind readiness to believe in them. 
This young world demands that not happiness, but unhappiness should 

Book One 
approach or become visible from outside; and its imagination is already 
busy turning this unhappiness into a monster ahead of time so that 
afterwards it can fight a monster. Were these distress-addicts to feel 
within themselves the power to do themselves good from within, to do 
something for themselves, they would know how to create their very 
own distress. Their inventions could then become more refined and 
their satisfactions sound like good music, while they now fill the world 
with their clamour about distress, and consequently, all too often with 
the feeling of distress! They do not know what to do with themselves -
and so they paint the unhappiness of others on the wall; they always 
need others! And continually other others! - Pardon me, my friends, I 
have ventured to paint my happiness on the wall. 35 
35 A reversal of the German expression 'Don't paint the devil on the wall' (because by doing so you 
will cause him to appear). 
65 

Book Two 

Book Two 
57 
To the realists. - You sober people who feel armed against passion and 
phantastical conceptions and would like to make your emptiness a 
matter of pride and an ornament - you call yourself realists and 
insinuate that the world really is the way it appears to you: before you 
alone reality stands unveiled, and you yourselves are perhaps the hest 
part of it - oh, you beloved images of Sais! 1 But aren't you too in your 
unveiled condition still most passionate and dark creatures, compared to 
fish, and still all too similar to an artist in love? And what is 'reality' to 
an artist in love! You still carry around the valuations of things that 
originate in the passions and loves of former centuries! Your sobriety 
still contains a secret and inextirpable drunkenness! Your love of 
'reality', for example - oh, that is an old, ancient 'love'! In every 
experience, in every sense impression there is a piece of this old love; 
and some fantasy, some prejudice, some irrationality, some ignorance, 
some fear, and whatever else, has worked on and contributed to it. That 
mountain over there! That cloud over there! What is 'real' about that? 
Subtract just once the phantasm and the whole human contribution from 
it, you sober ones! Yes, if you could do that! If you could forget your 
background, your past, your nursery school - all of your humanity and 
animality! There is no 'reality' for us - and not for you either, you sober 
ones - we are not nearly as strange to one another as you think, and 
perhaps our good will to transcend drunkenness is just as respectable as 
your belief that you are altogether incapable of drunkenness. 
58 
Only as creators! - This has caused me the greatest trouble and still does 
always cause me the greatest trouble: to realize that what things are called 
is unspeakably more important than what they are. The reputation, 
name, and appearance, the worth, the usual measure and weight of a 
thing - originally almost always something mistaken and arbitrary, 
thrown over things like a dress and quite foreign to their nature and 
even to their skin - has, through the belief in it and its growth from 
generation to generation, slowly grown onto and into the thing and has 
1 See above, 'Preface', footnote 5, p. 8. 
69 

The Cay Science 
become its very body: what started as appearance in the end nearly 
always becomes essence and ejfectively acts as its essence! What kind of a 
fool would believe that it is enough to point to this origin and this misty 
shroud of delusion in order to destroy the world that counts as 'real', so­
called 'reality'! Only as creators can we destroy! - But let us also not 
forget that in the long run it is enough to create new names and 
valuations and appearances of truth in order to create new 'things'. 
59 
We artists. - When we love a woman, we easily come to hate nature 
because of all the repulsive natural functions to which every woman is 
subject; we prefer not to think about it at all, but when our soul for once 
brushes against these matters, it shrugs impatiently and, as just said, 
casts a contemptuous look at nature: we feel insulted; nature seems to 
intrude on our property and with the most profane hands at that. In 
cases like this one refuses to hear anything about physiology and decrees 
secretly to oneself, 'I will hear nothing of the idea that the human being 
is anything other than soul and form!' 'The human being under the 
skin' is an abomination and unthinkable to all lovers, a blasphemy 
against God and love. Now, the way lovers still feel about nature and 
naturalness is how every worshipper of God and his 'holy omnipotence' 
formerly felt: in everything that was said about nature by astronomers, 
geologists, physiologists, and doctors, he saw an intrusion on his 
choicest property and thus an attack - and a shameless one at that! Even 
the 'law of nature' sounded to him like a slander against God; he would 
basically much rather have seen all of mechanics traced back to moral 
acts of will and choice - but since no one could do him that service, he 
concealed nature and mechanics from himself as hest he could and lived 
in a dream. Oh, these people of former times knew how to dream and 
didn't even need to fall asleep first! - and we men of today also still 
know it all too well, despite all our good will towards waking and the 
day! We need only to love, to hate, to desire, simply to feel - at once the 
spirit and power of the dream comes over us, and we climb with open 
eyes, impervious to all <langer, up the most dangerous paths, onto the 
roofs and towers of fantasy, and without any vertigo, as though horn to 
climb - we sleepwalkers of the day! We artists! We who conceal 
naturalness! We who are moon- and God-struck! We untiring wan-

Book Two 
derers, silent as death, on heights that we see not as heights but as our 
plains, as our safety. 
60 
Women and their action at a distance. - Do I still have ears? Arn I all ear 
and nothing else? Here I stand amidst the fire of the surf, whose white 
flames are licking at my feet: from all sides it is howling, threatening, 
screaming, shrieking at me, while the old earth-rattler 2 sings his aria in 
the lowest of depths, deep as a roaring bull, while pounding such an 
earth-rattling beat that the hearts of even these weather-beaten monsters 
of the rocks are trembling in their bodies. Suddenly, as if bom out of 
nothingness, there appears before the gate of this hellish labyrinth only 
a few fathoms away a large sailing ship, gliding along as silently as a 
ghost. Oh, this ghostly beauty! How magically it touches mel What? 
Has all the calm and silence of the world embarked here? Is my 
happiness itself sitting in this quiet place - my happier self, my second, 
immortalized self?3 Not yet to be dead, but also no longer alive? As a 
spiritlike, silent, watching, gliding, hovering intermediate being? As 
though I were that ship that moves over the dark sea with its white sails 
like an enormous butterfly! Yes! To move over existence! That's it! That 
would be it! - It seems as though the noise here has made me into a 
dreamer? All great noise makes us place happiness in silence and 
distance. When a man stands in the midst of his own noise, in the midst 
of his own surf of projects and plans, he is also likely to see gliding past 
him silent, magical creatures whose happiness and seclusion he yearns 
for - women. He almost believes that his better self lives there amongst 
the women: in these quiet regions even the loudest surf turns into 
deathly silence and life itself into a dream about life. Yet! Yet! My noble 
enthusiast, even on the most beautiful sailing ship there is so much 
sound and noise, and unfortunately so much small, petty noise! The 
magic and the most powerful effect of women is, to speak the language 
of the philosophers, action at a distance, actio in distans:4 but that 
requires, first and foremost - distance! 
2 The standard epithet of the Greek god Poseidon, who was thought to rule the seas and be 
responsible for earthquakes, is 'earth-shaker' (see Iliadv11.445, v111.201, 1x.362, etc.). 
3 The German term Nietzsche uses here means both 'dead' and 'made immortal'. 
4 'action at a distance' 
71 

The Cay Science 
In honour of friendship. - That the feeling of friendship was in antiquity 
considered the highest feeling, even higher than the most celebrated 
pride of the self-sufficient sage, indeed, as it were, as its sole and even 
holier sibling: this is very well expressed in the story of the Macedonian 
king who gave a world-despising Athenian philosopher a talent and got 
it back. 'What?' said the king, 'Has he then no friend?' 5 He meant: 'I 
honour this pride of the wise and independent man, but I would honour 
his humanity even more highly if the friend in him had won over his 
pride. The philosopher has lowered himself befare me by showing that 
he doesn't know one of the two highest feelings - and the higher one at 
that.' 
Love. - Love forgives the beloved even his lust. 
The woman in music. - Why do warm and rainy winds also bring on a 
musical mood and the inventive pleasure of melody? Are they not the 
same winds that fill the churches and give women thoughts of love? 
Sceptics. - I am afraid that old women in their most secret heart of 
hearts are more sceptical than all men: they believe the superficiality of 
existence to be its essence, and all virtue and depth is to them merely a 
veil over this 'truth', the very desirable veil over a pudendum - in other 
words, a matter of decency and shame, and no more! 
65 
Devotion. - There are noble women with a certain poverty of spirit who 
know no other way to express their deepest devotion than to offer their 
5 A talent is a large sum of money. I have been unable to <liseover the origin of this story. 
72 

Book Two 
virtue and sense of shame: it is what they hold as their highest 
possession. And aften this gift is accepted without incurring as 
profound an obligation as the donors suppose - a very melancholy story! 
66 
The strength of the weak. - All women are subtle at exaggerating their 
weaknesses; indeed they are inventive at weaknesses in arder to appear 
as utterly fragile ornaments that are harmed by even a speck of dust: 
their way of living is supposed to remind men of their clumsiness and 
burden their conscience with this. Thus they defend themselves against 
the strong and 'the law of the jungle'. 
Feigning oneself. - She loves him now and gazes ahead with such calm 
confidence, like a cow. But alas! What bewitched him was precisely that 
she seemed utterly changeable and unfathomable! He already had too 
much steady weather in himself! Wouldn't she do well to feign her old 
character? To feign lovelessness? Isn't that the counsel of - love? Vivat 
comoedia/6 
68 
Will and willingness. - Someone took a youth to a wise man and said: 
'Look, he is being corrupted by women!' The wise man shook his head 
and smiled. 'It is men who corrupt women', he exclaimed, 'and the 
failings of women should be atoned for and set right in men - for man 
makes for himself the image (Bild) of woman, and woman shapes herself 
(bi/det sich) according to this image (Bild)'. 'You are too gentle towards 
women', said one in the company; 'you do not know them!' The wise 
man replied, 'The way of men is will; the way of women is willingness -
that is the law of the sexes; truly a hard law for women! All human 
beings are innocent of their existence; women, however, are doubly 
innocent. Who could have oil and mercy enough for them?' 'Forget oil! 
Forget gentleness!' shouted someone else from the crowd; 'one has to 
6 'Long live comedy!' 
73 

The Cay Science 
raise women better!' 'One has to raise men better', said the wise man and 
beckoned to the youth to follow him. - But the youth did not follow him. 
69 
Capacity forrevenge. - That someone cannot defend himself and there­
fore also does not want to - this is not enough to disgrace him in our 
eyes; but we have a low regard for anyone who has neither the capacity 
nor the good will for revenge - regardless of whether it is a man or a 
woman. Would a woman be able to hold us (or 'enthrall' us, as they say) 
if we did not consider her able under certain circumstances to wield a 
dagger deftly (any kind of dagger) against us? Or against herself - which 
in certain cases would be the more severe revenge (Chinese revenge). 
70 
The women who master the masters. - A deep and powerful alto voice, 
such as one sometimes hears in the theatre, suddenly raises the curtain 
upon possibilities that we usually do not believe in. All at once we 
believe that somewhere in the world there could be women with lofty, 
heroic, royal souls, capable of and ready for grandiose retorts, resolu­
tions, and sacrifices, capable of and ready for mastery over men, because 
in them the best of man aside from his sex has become an incarnate 
ideal. To be sure, the intention of the theatre is not at all that such voices 
convey this concept of women; normally they are supposed to represent 
the ideal male lover, for example a Romeo; but to judge from my 
experience, the theatre quite regularly miscalculates on this point, as 
does the composer who expects such eff ects from such a voice. One does 
not believe in these lovers: such voices always retain a motherly and 
housewif ely colouring, and most of all when love is in their tone. 
71 
On female chastity. - There is something quite amazing and monstrous 
in the upbringing of upper-class women; indeed, maybe there is nothing 
more paradoxical. The whole world agrees that they should be brought 
up as ignorant as possible about matters erotic, and that one has to 
impart in their souls a deep shame in the face of such things and the 
74 

Book Two 
most extreme impatience and flight at the merest suggestion of them. 
Really, in this matter alone the 'honour' of a woman in its entirety is at 
risk: what else would one not forgive them? But here they are supposed 
to remain ignorant deep in their hearts: they are supposed to have 
neither eyes, nor ears, nor words, nor thoughts for this their 'evil'; yes, 
even knowledge is here an evil. And then to be hurled as if by a 
gruesome lightning bolt into reality and knowledge, with marriage -
and precisely by the man they love and esteem the most: to catch love 
and shame in a contradiction and to have to experience all at once 
delight, surrender, duty, pity, terror at the unexpected proximity of god 
and beast, and who knows what else! There one has tied a psychic knot 
that may have no equal. Even the compassionate curiosity of the wisest 
connoisseur of human psychology (Menschenkenner) is insufficient for 
guessing how this or that woman manages to accommodate herself to 
this solution of the riddle and to this riddle of a solution, and what 
dreadful, far-reaching suspicions must stir in her poor, unhinged soul; 
indeed, how the ultimate philosophy and scepticism of woman casts 
anchor at this point! Afterwards, the same deep silence as before, and 
often a silence directed at herself; she closes her eyes to hersel( Young 
women try very hard to appear superficial and thoughtless; the most 
refined among them simulate a kind of impertinence. Women easily 
experience their men as a question-mark regarding their honour and 
their children as an apology or atonement - they need children and wish 
for them in an altogether different way from that in which a man wishes 
for children. In sum, one cannot be too gentle towards women! 
72 
Mothers. - Animals think differently about females than humans do; 
they consider the female to be the productive being. There is no 
paternal love among them, only something like love for the children of a 
beloved and a getting used to them. In their children females have a 
satisfaction of their desire to dominate, a possession, an occupation, 
something that is totally intelligible to them and can be prattled with: all 
this taken together is motherly love - it is to be compared to the love of 
an artist for his work. Pregnancy has made women gentler, more 
patient, more timid, more pleased to submit; and just so does spiritual 
pregnancy produce the character of the contemplative type, to which 
75 

The Cay Science 
the female character is related: these are male mothers. - Among 
animals the male sex is considered the beautiful one. 
73 
Holy cruelty. -A man holding a newborn in his hand approached a holy 
man. 'What should I do with this child?' he asked; 'it is wretched, 
misshapen, and doesn't have life enough to die'. 'Kill it!' shouted the 
holy man with a terrible voice; 'kill it and hold it in your arms for three 
days and three nights to create a memory for yourself: thus you will 
never again beget a child when it is not time for you to beget'. When the 
man had heard this, he walked away disappointed; and many people 
reproached the holy man because he had advised a cruelty; for he had 
advised killing the child. 'But is it not crueller to let it live?' said the 
holy man. 
74 
The unsuccessful. - Those poor women are always unsuccessful who, in 
the presence of the one they love, become restless and insecure and talk 
too much: for men are most surely seduced by a certain secret and 
phlegmatic tenderness. 
75 
The third sex. - 'A small man is a paradox, but still a man; but small 
women seem to me, when compared to tall women, to belong to another 
sex', said an old dancing master. A small woman is never beautiful - said 
old Aristotle. 7 
The greatest danger. - Had there not always been a majority of men who 
felt the discipline of their heads - their 'rationality' - to be their pride, 
their obligation, their virtue, and who were embarrassed or ashamed by 
all fantasizing and debauchery of thought, being the friends of 'healthy 
common sense', humanity would have perished long ago! The greatest 
7 Aristotle doesn't actually say exactly this, but see his Nichomachean Ethics 1123b.6-8 and Rhetoric 
1361a. 6-7. 

Book Two 
<langer that hovered and still havers over humanity is the outbreak of 
madness - that is, the outbreak of arbitrariness in feeling, seeing, and 
hearing; the enjoyment in the lack of discipline of the head, the joy in 
human unreason. The opposite of the world of the madman is not truth 
and certainty but the generality and universal bindingness of a faith; in 
short, the non-arbitrary in judgement. And man's greatest labour so far 
has been to reach agreement about very many things and to lay down a 
law of agreement - regardless of whether these things are true or false. 
This is the discipline of the head which has preserved humanity - but 
the counter-drives are still so powerful that it is basically with little 
confidence that one may speak of the future of humanity. The picture of 
things still maves and shifts continually, and perhaps more and faster 
from now on than ever befare; continually, the most select minds bristle 
at this universal bindingness - the explorers of truth above all! Con­
tinually this faith, as a commonplace belief shared by everyone, breeds 
nausea and a new lust in subtler minds; and the slow tempo for all 
spiritual processes which this faith makes necessary, this imitation of the 
tortoise that is recognized as the norm here, would by itselfbe sufficient 
to turn artists and poets into deserters: it is these impatient minds in 
whom a veritable delight in madness breaks out, because madness has 
such a cheerful tempo! What is needed, then, are virtuous intellects -
oh, I'll use the most unambiguous word - what is needed is virtuous 
stupidity; what is needed are unwavering beat-keepers of the slow spirit, 
so that the believers of the great common faith stay together and go on 
dancing their dance: it is an exigency of the first arder which commands 
and demands. We others are the exception and the danger - we stand 
eternally in need of defence! - Now there is certainly something to be 
said for the exception, provided it never wants to become the rute. 
77 
The animal with a good conscience. - The vulgar element in everything 
that pleases in Southern Europe - be it ltalian opera (e.g. Rossini and 
Bellini)8 or the Spanish adventure novel (most readily accessible to us in 
8 Gioachino Rossini (1792-1868) wrote thirty-six operas in the years between 1810 and 1829, then 
retired, devoting the remaining forty years of his life to culinary pleasures in Paris. Vincenzo 
Bellini's (1801-35) most famous opera is Norma. The music of Rossini and Bellini was very 
highly regarded by Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1860), the modem philosopher who influenced 
the young Nietzsche most deeply. 
77 

The Cay Science 
the French disguise of Gil Blas)9 - does not escape me; but it does not 
offend me, just as little as does the vulgarity that one encounters on a 
walk through Pompeii and basically even when reading any ancient 
hook. 10 Why is this? Is it because there is no shame and everything 
vulgar acts as confidently and self-assuredly as anything noble, lovely, 
and passionate in the same kind of music or novel? 'The animal has its 
own right, just like the human being; let it run about freely - and you 
too, my dear fellow man, are still an animal despite everything!' - That 
seems to me to be the moral of the story and the peculiarity of Southern 
humanity. Bad taste has its right just as good taste does - and even a 
prior right if it answers to a great need, provides guaranteed satisfaction 
and as it were a universal language, an unconditionally intelligible mask 
and gesture; good, refined taste, on the contrary, is always somewhat 
searching, deliberate, not altogether sure how it is to be understood: it is 
not and never was popular! What is and remains popular is the mask! So 
let them all continue to go their way, all those masklike elements in the 
melodies and cadenzas, in the leaps and gaieties of the rhythm of these 
operas! Ancient life, too! What can one understand about it when one 
does not understand the delight in the mask, the good conscience in 
everything mask-like! Here is the bath and the recreation of the ancient 
spirit - and maybe the rare and sublime natures of the old world needed 
this bath more than the vulgar. A vulgar turn in Northern works, for 
example in German music, on the other hand, offends me unspeakably. 
Here there is shame; the artist has lowered himself in his own eyes and 
could not even help blushing: we are ashamed with him and are so 
off ended because we suspect that he believed he had to lower himself 
for our sakes. 
What we should be grateful for. - Only artists, and especially those of the 
theatre, have given men eyes and ears to see and hear with some pleasure 
what each himself is, himself experiences, himself wants; only they have 
9 Histoire de Git Blas de Santillane (4 vols., 1715-35) by Alain-Rene Lesage is one ofthe original 
picaresque novels. 
10 The Roman city of Pompeii, near present-day Naples, was preserved by being covered in ash by 
an eruption ofthe volcano Vesuvius in AD 79. Excavation ofthe site began in the mid-nineteenth 
century. Nietzsche visited Naples and its environs several times. The 'vulgarity' of which he 
speaks is probably the prominent display of a variety of forms of erotic art. 

Book Two 
taught us to value the hero that is bidden in each of these everyday 
characters and taught the art of regarding oneself as a hero, from a 
distance and as it were simplified and transfigured - the art of 'putting 
oneself on stage' before oneself. Only thus can we get over certain lowly 
details in ourselves. Without this art we would be nothing but fore­
ground, and would live entirely under the spell of that perspective 
which makes the nearest and most vulgar appear tremendously hig and 
as reality itself. Maybe there is a similar sort of merit in that religion 
which bade one to see the sinfulness of every individual through a 
magnifying glass and turned the sinner into a great, immortal criminal: 
by describing eternal perspectives around him, it taught man to view 
himself from a distance and as something past and whole. 
79 
The attraction of imperfection. - I see here a poet who, like some people, 
exerts a greater attraction through his imperfections than through all 
that reaches completion and perfection under his hand - indeed, his 
advantage and farne are due much more to his ultimate incapacity than 
to his ample strength. His work never wholly expresses what he really 
would like to express, what he would like to have seen: it seems as if he 
has had the foretaste of a vision, but never the vision itself - yet a 
tremendous lust for this vision remains in his soul, and it is from this 
that he derives his equally tremendous eloquence of desire and craving. 
With it he lifts his listener above his work and all 'works' and lends him 
wings to rise to heights which listeners otherwise never reach; and so, 
having themselves become poets and seers, they give the creator of their 
happiness their due admiration, as if he had led them immediately to 
the vision of what was for him holiest and most ultimate; as if he had 
really attained his goal and really seen and communicated his vision. 
The faet that he never reached his goal benefits his farne. 
80 
Art and nature. - The Greeks (or at least the Athenians) liked to hear 
good speech; indeed, they had a greedy craving for it which distin­
guishes them more than anything else from the non-Greeks. And so 
they demanded even of passion on stage that it speak well, and 
79 

The Cay Science 
submitted with delight to the unnaturalness of dramatic verse - after all, 
in nature, passion is so taciturn! So mute and bashful! Or when it finds 
words, so confused and irrational and a shame to itself! Now thanks to 
the Greeks, we have all grown accustomed to this unnaturalness on 
stage, just as we endure and gladly endure that other unnaturalness, 
singing passion, thanks to the Italians. We have developed a need that we 
cannot satisfy in reality: to hear people in the most difficult situations 
speak well and at length; it delights us now when the tragic hero still 
finds words, reasons, eloquent gestures, and altogether a radiant spirit 
where life approaches the abyss and a real human being would usually 
lose his head and certainly his fine language. This kind of deviation from 
nature is perhaps the most pleasant meal for human pride; for its sake 
man loves art as the expression of a lofty, heroic unnaturalness and 
convention. We rightly reproach a dramatic poet if he does not trans­
form everything into reason and words but always retains in his hand a 
residue of silence - just as one is dissatisfied with the musician at the 
opera who cannot find a melody for the highest affect but only a 
sentimental 'natural' stammering and screaming. For here nature is 
supposed to be contradicted! Here the vulgar charm of illusion is supposed 
to give way to a higher charm! The Greeks go far, far on this road -
terrifyingly far! Just as they make the stage as narrow as possible and 
forbid themselves all effects through deep backgrounds; just as they 
make facial expressions and easy movement impossible for the actor and 
transform him into a solemn, stiff, masked puppet, so they also have 
deprived passion itself of any deep background and dictated to it a law 
of beautiful speech; yes, on the whole they have done everything to 
counteract the elemental effect of images that arouse fear and compas­
sion - for fear and compassion were precisely what they did not want. With 
all due respect to Aristotle, he certainly didn't hit the nail, let alone on 
the head, when he discussed the final purpose of Greek tragedy. 11 Just 
consider the Greek tragic poets and what most stimulated their indus­
triousness, their sensitivity, their competitiveness - certainly not the 
aim of overwhelming the spectator with emotions. The Athenian went 
to the theatre to hear pleasing speech! Pleasing speeches were what 
preoccupied Sophocles 12 - pardon the heresy! It is quite different with 
11 In his Poetics (chapter 6, 1449b.24ff.) Aristotle says that tragedy has its effect by producing 
'pity I compassion' and 'fear' in the audience. 
12 Athenian dramatist of the fifth century B c 
80 

Book Two 
serious opera. All of its masters try to keep the audience from under­
standing the characters. Occasionally catching a word might help the 
inattentive listener, but on the whole the situation must explain itself -
the speeches don't matter! This is how they all think and have pulled 
their pranks with words. Maybe they only lacked the courage to express 
fully their ultimate disregard for words: with just a little more impu­
dence, Rossini13 would have had everyone sing nothing but la-la-la-la -
and that would have made good sense. One shouldn't believe the words 
of characters in opera, but rather their sound! That is the difference, 
that is the beautiful unnaturalness for the sake of which one goes to the 
opera. Even the recitativo secco14 is not really meant to be heard as word 
and text: this kind of half-music is rather supposed initially to give the 
musical ear a short rest (rest from the melody as the most sublime and 
therefore also the most challenging pleasure of this art) - but very soon 
also something else, namely, a growing impatience, a growing aversion, 
a new desire for whole music, for melody. How are things with Richard 
Wagner's art, 15 considered from this perspective? Is it the same, 
perhaps? Perhaps different? Often it has seemed to me as if one had to 
memorize the words and music of his creations before the performance, 
for otherwise - so it appeared to me - one would hear neither the words 
nor even the music. 
Greek taste. - 'What is beautiful about that?' said the surveyor after a 
performance of Iphigenia. 'Nothing is proved in it!' 16 Were the Greeks 
13 See above, Book II footnote 8, p. 77. In Opera and Drama Wagner claims that Rossini had 
reduced opera to absolute melody, destroying its dramatic content and so opera itself. 
14 'dry recitative'. 'Recitative' is a style of composing vocal music that tries to keep the musical 
form as close as possible to the cadences of normal speech. 'Ory' recitative is one in which the 
musical texture is sparse and the voice or voices are accompanied only by a minimal number of 
instruments (e.g. keyboard and violoncello). 
15 Richard Wagner (1813-83) in his theoretical writings returned again and again to the question 
of the proper relation between words and music in opera. 
16 Nietzsche takes this anecdote from Schopenhauer's World as Will and Representation (vol. 1, 
Book 3, § 36) where it is used to illustrate the complete discrepancy between, on the one hand, 
the kind of intelligence used in everyday experience, science, and mathematics (ability, according 
to Schopenhauer, to subsume things under the 'principle of sufficient reason') and, on the other, 
aesthetic contemplation. The lphigenia in question is the play by the French dramatist Jean 
Racine (1639-99). 
81 

The Cay Science 
that far away from this taste? In Sophocles, at least, 'everything 1s 
proved'. 
Esprit 17 as un-Greek. - The Greeks are indescribably logical and simple 
in all their thought; at least in their long good age they never wearied of 
this, as so often do the French, who all too gladly take a little leap into 
the opposite and actually only end ure the spirit of logic when, through a 
series of such small leaps into the opposite, it betrays its sociable civility, 
its sociable self-denial. Logic strikes them as necessary, like bread and 
water, but also, like these, as a kind of prisoners' food as soon as it is 
enjoyed pure and plain. In good company one must never want to be 
entirely and solely right, which is what all pure logic wants; hence the 
small dose of unreason in all French esprit. The Greeks' sense of 
sociability was far less developed than that of the French is and was; that 
is why there is so little esprit in even their most spirited men; that is why 
there is so little humour in even their humorists; that is why - oh! One 
will not even believe these sentences of mine, and how many more of the 
same sort are yet on my mind! - Est res magna tacere18 - says Martial 
along with all garrulous people. 
Translations. - One can estimate the degree of an age's historical sense 
from the way it makes translations and seeks to absorb past ages and 
books. The French of Corneille's age19 as well as those of the Revolution 
seized Roman antiquity in a way we no longer dare to - thanks to our 
higher historical sense. And Roman antiquity itself: how violently and 
yet naively it laid its hand on everything good and lofty in the older 
Greek antiquity! How they translated things into the Roman present! 
How deliberately and insouciantly they brushed the dust off the wings 
of that butterfly called 'The-Twinkling-of-an-Eye'! In this way Horace 
17 'Spirit'; the word often refers to a lively irnagination. 
18 'It is a great thing to keep silent' (Martial IV .80.6). Martial was a Roman epigrarnrnatist who 
li ved in the first century AD. 
19 French drarnatist (1606-84) who wrote a nurnber oftragedies on ancient subjects 
82 

Book Two 
translated Alcaeus or Archilochus 20 now and then, as did Propertius 
with Callimachus and Philetas (poets of the same rank as Theocritus, 21 
if we may judge): what did they care that the real creator had 
experienced this and that and written the signs of it into his poem! As 
poets they were averse to the antiquarian inquisitiveness that precedes 
the sense for history; as poets, they did not accept these utterly personal 
things and names and all those things that serve as the mask and 
costume of a city, coast, century. Rather they quickly replaced them 
with what was contemporary and Roman. They seem to ask us: 'Should 
we not make new for ourselves what is old and put ourselves into it? 
Should we not be allowed to breathe our soul into their dead body? For 
it is dead, after all: how ugly everything dead is!' They did not know the 
pleasure of a sense for history; what was past and alien was embarrassing 
to them; and as Romans, they saw it as an incentive for a Roman 
conquest. In faet at that time one conquered by translating - not merely 
by leaving out the historical, but also by adding allusions to the present 
and, above all, crossing out the name of the poet and replacing it with 
one's own - not with any sense of theft but with the very hest conscience 
of the imperium Romanum. 22 
On the origin of poetry. - The !overs of what is fantastic in humans, who 
also advocate the view that morality is instinctive, reason as follows: 
'Supposing that usefulness has always been venerated as the supreme 
deity, then where in all the world does poetry come from? This aet of 
making speech rhythm counteracts rather than contributes to the clarity 
of communication, and yet it has shot up and is still shooting up all over 
the earth like a mockery of all useful expediency! The wildly beautiful 
irrationality of poetry refutes you, you utilitariansl Precisely to want to 
get away from usefulness for once - that is what has elevated humanity; 
that is what has inspired it to morality and art!' Now, in this case I must 
20 Archilochus (seventh century B c) and his slightly younger contemporary Alcaeus were early 
Greek poets who became models for the writing of poetry in Latin, for instance by Horace (first 
century B c ). 
21 The Roman poet Sextus Propertius (first century se) cites the Greek poets Callimachus and 
Philetas (both fourth/third century BC) as models (2.34.31-2; 3.1.1; 3.9.42-3). The Sicilian 
bucolic poet Theocritus ( early third century B c) also revered Philetas. 
22 'Roman empire' 

The Cay Science 
side with the utilitarians for once - after all, they are so seldom right, it 
is pitiful! In those ancient times that called poetry into being, one really 
did aim at utility, and a very great utility at that; back then, when one let 
rhythm penetrate speech - that rhythmic force that reorganizes all the 
atoms of a sentence, bids one to select one's words and gives thoughts a 
new colour and makes them darker, stranger, more distant: a superstitious 
utility, of course! Rhythm was supposed to make a human request 
impress the gods more deeply after it was noticed that humans 
remember a verse better than ordinary speech; one also thought one 
could make oneself audible over greater distances with the rhythmic 
tick-tock; the rhythmic prayer seemed to get doser to the ears of the 
gods. Above all, one wanted to take advantage of that elemental over­
powering force that humans experience in themselves when listening to 
music: rhythm is a compulsion; it engenders an unconquerable desire to 
yield, to join in; not only the stride of the feet but also the soul itself 
gives in to the beat - probably also, one inferred, the souls of the gods! 
By means of rhythm one thus tried to compel them and to exercise a 
power over them: one cast poetry around them like a magical snare. 
There was another, stranger notion, and it may be precisely what 
contributed most powerfully to the origin of poetry. Among the 
Pythagoreans 23 it appears as a philosophical doctrine and as an educa­
tional contrivance; but even long before there were philosophers, one 
acknowledged music to have the power to discharge the emotions, to 
cleanse the soul, to soothe the ferocia animi 24 - and indeed precisely 
through its rhythmic quality. When one had lost the proper tension and 
harmony of the soul, one had to dance to the beat of the singer - that 
was the prescription of this healing art. With it, Terpander quelled an 
uprising; with it, Empedocles pacified a lunatic; with it, Damon purged 
a youth who was languishing from love; with it, one also sought to 
appease the ferocious, vindictive gods.25 One began by driving the 
23 A group of philosophers centred in Southern ltaly who claimed to be followers of Pythagoras 
(sixth century B c ). They led a life of ritual purity and were especially devoted to the study of 
mathematics and harmonics. 
24 'ferocity of the soul' 
25 This anecdote about Terpander (seventh century BC ), one of the earliest Greek musicians who 
can be identified as a historical figure, is reported in chapter 42 of On Music, a short treatise 
(almost certainly incorrectly) attributed to Plutarch. The fifth-century (ec) Sicilian politician, 
philosopher, and shaman Empedocles had a keen interest in all sorts of purgatives. Damon was a 
fifth-century (ec) Athenian politician and theorist of music who was particularly interested in 
the effects of music on the soul. Plato's discussion of this topic in Book 111 of Republic is probably 

Book Two 
giddiness and exuberance of their passions to their peak, that is, one 
drove the madman wild, made the vindictive person drunk with lust for 
revenge. All orgiastic cults wanted to discharge the ferocia26 of some 
deity all at once and turn it into an orgy so that the deity would feel 
freer and calmer afterwards and leave man in peace. Etymologically, 
melos27 means a tranquillizer, not because it is itself tranquil, but 
because its effect makes one tranquil. And not only in the cult song, but 
also in the mundane song of the most ancient times there is the 
presumption that rhythmic quality exercises a magical force; when 
bailing water, for instance, or rowing, the song is a bewitchment of the 
demons believed to be at work here; it makes them compliant, unfree, 
and a tool of humans. And whenever one acts, one has an occasion to 
sing - every action is tied to the assistance of spirits: incantation and 
conjuration seem to be the primordial form of poetry. When verse was 
used in oracles - the Greeks said that the hexameter was invented at 
Delphi - rhythm was also supposed to exercise a compulsion. 28 To ask 
for a prophecy - that meant originally (according to the derivation of 
the Greek word that seems most probable to me) to have something 
determined: one thought one could force the future by gaining Apollo's 
favour - he who according to the oldest views is much more than a god 
of foresight. The way the formula is pronounced, with literal and 
rhythmic precision, is how it binds the future; the formula, however, is 
the invention of Apollo, who as god of rhythm can also bind the 
goddesses of fate. In short: was there anything more useful than rhythm 
to the old superstitious type of human being? One could do everything 
with it: promote some work magically; compel a god to appear, to be 
near, to listen; mould the future according to one's own will; discharge 
some excess (of fear, of mania, of pity, of vengefulness) from one's soul, 
and not only one's own soul but also that of the most evil <lemon. 
Without verse one was nothing; through verse one almost became a god. 
Such a basic feeling cannot be completely eradicated - and still today, 
after millennia of work at fighting such superstition, even the wisest of 
us occasionally becomes a fool for rhythm, if only insofar as he feels a 
influenced by his views, and Plato actually mentions him at 400s. This anecdote is recounted in 
Martianus Capella (probably fifth century A o ), De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii 1x.926. 
26 'ferocity' 
27 'musical phrase, tune, melody'. It is unclear on what Nietzsche is basing this etymological 
speculation. 
28 Pausanias x.5.7 
85 

The Cay Science 
thought to be truer when it has a metric form and presents itself with a 
divine hop, skip, and jump. Is it not amusing that the most serious 
philosophers, strict as they otherwise are in all matters of certainty, still 
appeal to the sayings of poets to lend their thoughts force and credibility? 
And yet it is more dangerous for a truth when a poet agrees with it than 
when he contradicts it! For as Homer says: 'The bards tell many a lie'.29 
85 
The good and the beautiful. - Artists constantly glorify - they do nothing 
else - and in particular all those states and things reputed to give man 
the occasion for once to f eel good, or great, or drunk, or merry, or well 
and wise. These select things and states, whose value for human 
happiness is considered certain and well-defined, are the artists' objects: 
artists always lie in wait to <liseover such things and to draw them into 
the realm of art. I want to say: they are not themselves the appraisers of 
happiness and of the happy man, but they always crowd around these 
appraisers with the greatest curiosity and the urge to make immediate 
use of their appraisals. They become like this because in addition to 
their impatience they also have the big lungs of heralds and the feet of 
runners, and are always among the first to glorify the new good, and 
often appear to be the first to name it good and to appraise it as good. 
This, however, as I already said, is a mistake: they are only quicker and 
louder than the real appraisers. - But who are the real appraisers? - The 
rich and the idle. 
86 
On theatre. - This day I had strong and elevated feelings again, and if 
on its eve I could have music and art, I know very well what music and 
art I would not like to have, namely, the kind that tries to intoxicate its 
audience and drive it to the height of a moment of strong and elevated 
feelings - an art for those everyday souls who in the evening look not 
like victors on triumphal chariots but rather like tired mules who have 
been whipped somewhat too often by life. What would those people 
know of 'higher moods' were there no intoxicating substances and 
29 Not actually to be found in Homer, but a proverbial Greek saying. See Aristotle, Metaphysics 
983a.3 and Solon, Fragment 21 (Diels). 
86 

Book Two 
whip-lashes of ideals! - and so they have their inspirers as they have 
their wines. But what is their drink and their drunkenness to me! What 
is wine to the inspired! He looks instead with a sort of disgust at the 
means and the mediators that are supposed to produce an effect without 
sufficient reason - aping the high tide of the soul! What? One gives the 
mole wings and proud conceits - before bedtime, before he crawls into 
his hole? One sends him to the theatre and puts big glasses before his 
blind and tired eyes? People whose lives are not a 'dramatic action' but a 
business sit before the stage and look at strange creatures for whom life 
is more than a business? 'It's proper that way', you say; 'i t's entertaining 
that way; it's culture!' Well then! In that case I all too often lack culture, 
for this sight is all too often disgusting to me. Whoever has enough 
tragedy and comedy in himself probably does best to stay away from the 
theatre; or, should there be an exception, the entire event - including 
theatre and audience and poet - becomes the actual tragic and comic 
spectacle to him, so that the piece that is performed means little to him 
by comparison. What do the Fausts and Manfreds 30 of the theatre 
matter to someone who is himself somewhat like Faust and Manfred? -
whereas the faet that such figures are brought on stage is certainly 
something for him to think about. The strongest thoughts and passions 
are there presented before those who are capable not of thought and 
passion - but of intoxication! And the former as a means to the latter! 
And theatre and music as the hashish-smoking and betel-chewing of the 
European! Oh, who will tell us the entire history of narcotics? - It is 
nearly the history of 'culture', our so-called higher culture! 
On the vanity of artists. - I believe that artists often do not know what 
they can do best because they are too vain and have set their minds on 
something prouder than these small plants seem to be that are new, 
strange, and beautiful and really capable of growing to perfection on 
their soil. That which in the last instance is good in their own garden 
and vineyard is not fully appreciated by them, and their love and insight 
are not of the same order. Here is a musician who, more than any other 
musician, is master at tinding the tones from the realm of suffering, 
30 In Byron's tragedy Manfred (1817) the hero is burdened with excessive knowledge and tries in 
vain to attain forgetfulness. 

The Cay Science 
dejected, tormented souls and at giving speech even to the mute 
animals. Nobody equals him at the colours of late autumn, at the 
indescribably moving happiness of a last, very last, very briefest enjoy­
ment; he knows a tone for those secret, uncanny midnights of the soul, 
where cause and effect seem to have gone awry and something can come 
to be 'from nothing' at any moment; more happily than anyone else, he 
draws from the very bottom of human happiness and so to speak from 
its drained cup, where the most bitter and repulsive drops have merged, 
for better or for worse, with the sweetest ones; he knows how the soul 
wearily drags itself along when it can no longer leap and fly, nor even 
walk; he has the shy glance of concealed pain, of understanding without 
solace, of taking farewell without confession; yes, as the Orpheus 31 of all 
secret misery he is greater than anyone, and he has incorporated into art 
some things that seemed inexpressible and even unworthy of art, and 
which could only be scared away and not be grasped by words in 
particular - some very small and microscopic features of the soul: yes, 
he is master at the very small. But he doesn't want to be! His character 
likes great walls and bold frescoes much better! It escapes him that his 
spirit has a different taste and disposition and likes hest of all to sit 
quietly in the corners of collapsed houses - there, bidden, bidden from 
himself, he paints his real masterpieces, which are all very short, often 
only a bar long - only there does he become wholly good, great, and 
perfect; perhaps only there. - But he doesn't know it! He is too vain to 
know it. 
88 
Being serious about truth. - Being serious about truth! How differently 
people understand these words! The very same opinions and types of 
proof and scrutiny that a thinker may consider a frivolity in himself to 
which he has, to his shame, succumbed on this or that occasion - these 
very same views may give an artist who encounters them and lives with 
them for a while the feeling that he has now become deeply serious 
about truth and that it is admirable that he, as an artist, has at the same 
time the most serious desire for the opposite of appearance. So it can 
happen that it is precisely with his ardent seriousness that someone 
31 The legendary Orpheus was supposed to be able to do extraordinary things, such as bringing his 
wife back to life from the dead, through the power of his music. 
88 

Book Two 
betrays how shallow and undemanding his mind has been in playing the 
field of knowledge so far. - And does not everything that we take to be 
important betray us? It shows us what sort of thing has weight for us and 
for what sort of thing we have no weights. 
Now and formerly. - What do all our art of artworks matter if we lose 
that higher art, the art of festivals! Former ly, all artworks were displayed 
on the great festival road of humanity, as commemorations and memor­
ials of high and happy moments. Now one uses artworks to lure poor, 
exhausted, and sick human beings to the side of humanity's road of 
suffering for a short lascivious moment; one offers them a little 
intoxication and madness. 
Lights and shadows. - Books and drafts mean different things to different 
thinkers: one has collected in a book the lights that he was able swiftly to 
steal and carry home from the rays of some insight that dawned on him; 
another is able to convey only the shadows, the after-images in grey and 
black, of that which built itself up in his soul the day befare. 
91 
Caution. - As is well known, Alfieri32 lied very much when he told his 
amazed contemporaries his life story. He lied from that despotism 
against himself which he also revealed in the way he created his own 
language and tyrannized himself into becoming a poet - he had finally 
found a severe form of sublimity into which he pressed his life and his 
memory: no doubt there was much agony in all this. - I also would not 
believe a life story of Plato, written by himself - any more than that of 
Rousseau33 or the vita nuova34 of Dante. 
32 an important Italian dramatist (1749-1803) 
33 In addition to his political writings (e.g. The Social Contract) Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-78) 
wrote an important autobiography, the Confessions (1781). 
34 Vita Nuova ('New Life') is a collection ofDante Alighieri's (1265-1321) poems connected by 
prose commentaries of a semi-autobiographical kind. 
89 

The Cay Science 
92 
Prose and poetry. - It is remarkable that the great masters of prose have 
almost always also been poets, be it publicly or only in secret, in the 
'closet'; and verily, one writes good prose only face to face with poetry! 
For this is an uninterrupted, courteous war with poetry: all its attrac­
tions depend on the faet that poetry is constantly evaded and contra­
dicted; everything abstract wants to be presented as a prank against 
poetry and as if with a mocking voice; everything dry and cool is 
supposed to drive the lovely goddess into lovely despair; often there are 
rapprochements, reconciliations for a moment, and then a sudden leap 
back and derisive laugh; often the curtain is raised and a harsh light is 
let in just as the goddess is enjoying her dusks and muted colours; often 
the word is taken out of her mouth and sung according to a melody that 
makes her cover her refined ears with her refined hands - and so there 
are a thousand delights of this war, including defeat, of which the 
unpoetic, the so-called men of prose, know nothing at all - which is why 
they write and speak only bad prose! War is the father of all good things;35 
war is also the father of good prose! In this century, four very strange 
and truly poetic persons attained a mastery of prose, for which this 
century is otherwise not made - out of a lack of poetry, as I have 
suggested. Excluding Goethe, who may fairly be claimed by the century 
that produced him, I see Giacomo Leopardi, Prosper Merimee, Ralph 
Waldo Emerson, and Walter Savage Landor, the author of Imaginary 
Conversations, 36 as worthy of being called masters of prose. 
93 
But then why do you write? - A: I am not one of those who think with a 
wet quill in hand; much less one of those who abandon themselves to 
their passions right before the open inkwell, sitting on their chair and 
staring at the paper. I am annoyed or ashamed by all writing; to me, 
35 Variant of the famous saying by the pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus of Ephesus (late sixth 
century B c ): 'War is the father of all things.' This is number 53 in the standard collections 
(Diels-Kranz). 
36 Giacomo Leopardi (1798-1837); ltalian lyric poet, also admired for his prose writings, notably 
Operette Mora/i (1827). The French writer Prosper Merimee (1803-70) is now perhaps best 
known as the author of a 'Carmen' on which the libretto of the opera of that name by Bizet is 
based. Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-82) was an American 'Transcendentalist' writer highly 
regarded by Nietzsche. Walter Savage Landor (1775-1864)was an English prose writer. 

Book Two 
writing is nature's call - to speak of it even in simile is repugnant to me. 
B: But why, then, do you write? - A: Well, my friend, I say this in 
confidence: until now I have found no other means of getting rid of my 
thoughts. - B: And why do you want to get rid of them? - A: Why do I 
want to? Do I want to? I have to. - B: Enough! Enough! 
94 
Growth afier death. - Those audacious little words about moral matters 
that Fontenelle threw out in his immortal Dialogues of the Dead37 were 
considered in his time to be paradoxes and games of a not wholly 
innocent wit; even the highest judges of taste and of the mind saw 
nothing more in it - indeed, maybe not even Fontenelle himself. Now 
something incredible transpires: these thoughts become truths! Science 
proves them! The game gets serious! And we read these dialogues with a 
different feeling than Voltaire38 and Helvetius 39 read them, and invo­
luntarily we promote their creators to a different and much higher rank 
of mind than they did. Rightly? Wrongly? 
95 
Chamfort.40 -That someone who knew humanity and the masses as well 
as Chamfort still joined the masses and did not stand aside in philoso­
phical renunciation and defence, I can only explain as follows: one 
instinct in him was stronger than his wisdom and was never satisfied: 
his hatred of all nobility of blood; perhaps his mother's old hatred, 
which was only too easy to explain and which he had sanctified through 
love of his mother - an instinct for revenge harking back to his 
boyhood, waiting for the hour to avenge his mother. And now his life 
and his genius - and alas! no doubt mostly the paternal blood in his 
veins - had seduced him to join the ranks of this nobility as an equal, for 
many, many years! But eventually he could no longer stand the sight of 
37 See above, Book I, footnote 3, p. 31. 
38 See above, Book I, footnote 27, p. 55. 
39 French Encyclopedist who defended a form of hedonistic materialism in his major work On the 
Spirit (1758) 
40 French politician and writer (1741-94). Nietzsche's source for most of the material in this 
section is Histoire de Chamfort, sa vie et ses æuvres by P.-J. Stahl (Paris, no date of publication 
given), a book which Nietzsche had in his library. 
91 

The Cay Science 
himself, the sight of the 'old type of man' under the old regime; he was 
gripped with a violent passion of repentance which led him to put on 
the clothes of the mob, as his kind of hairshirt! His bad conscience was 
his failure to take revenge. If Chamfort had remained just a little bit 
more a philosopher, the Revolution would not have had its tragic wit 
and sharpest sting: it would be considered a much stupider event and 
would not seduce so many minds. But Chamfort's hatred and revenge 
educated a whole generation, and the most illustrious human beings 
passed through this school. Note that Mirabeau 41 looked up to Cham­
fort as to his higher and older self from which he expected and endured 
impulses, warnings, and verdicts - Mirabeau, who as a human being 
belongs to a quite different order of greatness than even the foremost 
statesmen of yesterday and today. It is peculiar that despite such a friend 
and advocate - after all, we have Mirabeau's letters to Chamfort - this 
wittiest of all moralists has remained a stranger to the French, no less 
than Stendhal, 42 who has per haps had the most thoughtful eyes and ears 
of all Frenchmen of this century. Is it that the latter basically had too 
much of the Dutchman or Englishman within himself to be tolerable to 
the Parisians? Whereas Chamfort, a man who was rich in depths and 
backgrounds of the soul - gloomy, suffering, ardent - a thinker who 
found laughter necessary as a remedy against life and who nearly 
considered himself lost on those days when he had not laughed - seems 
much more like an ltalian, related to Dante and Leopardi, than a 
Frenchman! We know Chamfort's last words: 'Ah! mon ami', he said to 
Sieyes,43 'je m'en vais enfin de ce monde, ou il faut que le creur se brise 
ou se bronze -' 44 Those are surely not the words of a dying 
Frenchman. 
Two speakers. - Of these two speakers, the one can show the full 
rationality of his cause only when he abandons himself to passion: this 
41 An important political figure in the early stages of the French Revolution, admired by 
Nietzsche: see The Genealogy of Morality 1.10. 
42 French novelist (1783-1842). He was bom Marie Henri Beyle, 'Stendhal' being a pseudonym. 
43 French politician and theorist whose What is the Third Estate? (1789) had great influence on the 
early course of the French Revolution. 
44 'Ah, my friend, I am finally about to leave this world in which the heart must either break or 
plate itself with steel.' 

Book Two 
alone pumps enough blood and heat into his brain to force his lofty 
intellect to reveal itself. The other attempts the same thing now and 
then - to present his cause with the help of passion, sonorously, 
violently, and captivatingly - but usually with little success. He then 
quite soon starts speaking obscurely and confusedly; he exaggerates, 
makes omissions, and arouses mistrust about the rationality of his cause; 
indeed, he himself comes to feel this mistrust, and this explains sudden 
leaps into the coldest and most repugnant tones which make the 
audience doubt whether his whole passion was genuine. In his case, 
passion inundates the mind every time - maybe because it is stronger 
than in the first speaker. But he is at the peak of his strength when he 
resists the pressing storm of his feeling and virtually derides it: only 
then does his mind completely step out of its hiding place - a logical, 
mocking, playful, and yet terrifying mind. 
97 
On the garrulousness of writers. - There is a garrulousness of rage -
frequent in Luther, also in Schopenhauer. A garrulousness due to an 
exceedingly large supply of conceptual formulations, as in Kant. A 
garrulousness due to a delight in ever-new twists of the same thing: one 
finds this in Montaigne. A garrulousness of spiteful natures: whoever 
reads the publications of our time will recall two writers here. A 
garrulousness from a delight in good words and forms of language: not 
rare in Goethe's prose. A garrulousness from an inner pleasure in noise 
and confusion offeelings: for example in Carlyle.45 
98 
In praise of Shakespeare. - The most beautiful thing I can say in praise 
of Shakespeare as a human being is this: he believed in Brutus and didn't 
cast a speck of suspicion on this type of virtuel To him he devoted his 
hest tragedy - it is still called by the wrong name46 - to him and to the 
most dreadful epitome of lofty morality. Independence of soul! That's 
what's at stake here! No sacrifice can be too great for that: one has to be 
capable of sacrificing even one's dearest friend for it, even if he should 
45 British writer on history and politics (1795-1881). 
46 Shakespeare's The Tragedy ofJulius Caesar 
93 

The Cay Science 
be the most marvellous human being, the ornament of the world, the 
genius without peer - if one loves freedom as the freedom of great souls 
and this freedom is endangered because of him: that is what Shakespeare 
must have felt! The height at which he places Caesar is the finest 
honour he could bestow on Brutus: only thus does he raise Brutus' 
inner problem to immense proportions as well as the strength of mind 
that was able to cut this knot! And was it really political freedom that 
drove this poet to sympathize with Brutus - and turned him into 
Brutus' accomplice? Or was political freedom only a symbolism for 
something inexpressible? Could it be that we confront some unknown 
dark event and adventure from the poet's own soul about which he 
wanted to speak only in signs? What is all of Hamlet's melancholy 
compared to that of Brutus! And perhaps Shakespeare knew the latter 
as he knew the former - through first-hand experience! Maybe he also 
had his dark hour and his evil angel, like Brutus! But whatever such 
similarities and secret references there may have been: before the whole 
figure and virtue of Brutus, Shakespeare threw himself to the ground 
and felt unworthy and distant - he wrote the evidence for this into his 
tragedy. Twice in the tragedy he introduced a poet,47 and twice he 
poured such impatient and ultimate contempt upon him that it sounds 
like a cry - like the cry of self-contempt. Brutus, even Brutus loses 
patience when the poet enters - conceited, pathetic, obtrusive, as poets 
usually are - as a being who appears to be bursting with possibilities of 
greatness, even moral greatness, although in the philosophy of deed and 
life he rarely attains even a passable integrity. 'When he knows his time, 
!'li know his humour. I What should the wars do with these jiggling 
fools? I Companion, hence!'48 shouts Brutus. This should be translated 
back into the soul of the poet who wrote it. 
99 
Schopenhauer's followers. - What happens when people of a higher 
culture and barbarians come into contact: the lower culture usually 
takes on the vices, weaknesses, and excesses of the higher culture, on 
which basis it feels a certain attraction to that culture and finally, by way 
47 Aet 111, Scene 3 and Aet! v, Scene 3 
48 Nietzsche read and cited Shakespeare in the translation by Schlegel and Tieck. The text gives 
the English original. The italics are Nietzsche's own. 
94 

Book Two 
of the acquired vices and weaknesses, accepts some overflow of the 
valuable force of the higher culture - one can also observe this nearby 
and without traveiling to barbarian peoples, to be sure in a form that is 
somewhat over-refined and intellectualized and not so easily palpable. 
And what do Schopenhauer's German followers usually take over at first 
from their master? In relation to his higher culture, they must feel 
barbarous enough to be at first barbarously fascinated and seduced by 
him. Is it his sense for hard facts, his good will to clarity and reason, that 
so often makes him appear so English and so un-German? Or is it the 
strength of his intellectual conscience, which endured a life-long contra­
diction between being and willing and forced him to contradict himself 
continually and on almost every point in his writings? Or is it his 
cleanliness in matters of the church and of the Christian god? - for here 
his cleanliness was unprecedented among German philosophers, so that 
he lived and <lied 'as a Voltairean'.49 Or was it his immortal doctrine of 
the intellectuality of intuition, of the a priori nature of the causal law, of 
the instrumental nature of the intellect and the unfreedom of the will?50 
No, all this does not enchant and is not felt to be enchanting; but 
Schopenhauer's mystical embarrassments and evasions in those places 
where the factual thinker let himself be seduced and corrupted by the 
vain urge to be the unriddler of the world; the indemonstrable doctrine 
of One Will ('all causes are merely occasional causes of the appearance of 
the will at this time and this place'; 'the will to life is present wholly and 
undividedly in every being, even the least, as completely as in all beings 
that have ever been, are, and shall be, taken together'), 51 the denial of the 
individua/ ('all lions are at bottom only one lion'; 'the plurality of 
individuals is an illusion', 52 just as development is only an illusion - he 
calls Lamarck's thoughts 'an ingenious, absurd error'), 53 his ecstatic 
reveries on genius ('in aesthetic intuition the individual is no longer 
individual but pure, will-less, painless, timeless subject of knowledge'; 
'the subject, in being wholly taken up in the object it intuits, has become 
the object itself'), 54 the nonsense about compassion and how, as the 
49 The outspoken anti-clericalism of Voltaire (see above, Hook 1, footnote 27, p. 55) gave him the 
reputation of being an atheist. 
50 See World as Wi/1 and Representation, vol. 1, Hook 4, § 54, and vol. I I, Hook 2, §§ 19, 4. 
51 Ibid., vol. 1, Hook 4, § 60 and vol. I I, Hook 2, § 25 
52 Ibid., vol. 1, Hook 2, § 28; vol. 1 I, Hook 3, § 38, and vol. I I, Hook 4, § 41 
53 French naturalist (1744-1829) who believed that acquired characteristics could be biologically 
inherited 
54 See World as Wi/1 and Representation, vol. I, Hook 3, § 38. 
95 

The Cay Science 
source of all morality, it enables one to make the break through the 
principium individuationis;55 and also such claims as 'death is actually the 
purpose of existence', 56 'one cannot deny a priori the possibility that a 
magical effect cannot also emanate from someone who has already died' 
- these and other such excesses and vices of the philosopher are always 
what is accepted first of all and made into a matter of faith - for vices 
and excesses are the easiest to imitate and require no extensive 
preparatory practice. But let us discuss the most famous of living 
Schopenhauerians, Richard Wagner. What happened to him has hap­
pened to other artists: he misinterpreted the characters he created and 
misunderstood the philosophy that was implicit in his own art. Until 
the middle of his lif e, Richard Wagner let himself be misled by Hegel; 
he repeated this mistake when he started reading Schopenhauer's 
doctrine into his characters and began expressing himself in terms of 
'will', 'genius', and 'compassion'. Nevertheless it will remain true that 
nothing goes so directly against the spirit of Schopenhauer as what is 
genuinely Wagnerian in Wagner's heroes: I mean the innocence of the 
utmost selfishness; the faith in great passion as the good in itself, in a 
word, what is Siegfried-like 57 in the countenances of his heroes. 'All of 
this smells even more like Spinoza than like me', Schopenhauer might 
say. Although Wagner would have good reason to look for some other 
philosopher than Schopenhauer, the enchantment to which he suc­
cumbed with regard to this thinker has blinded him not only to other 
philosophers but also to science; his entire art increasingly wants to 
present itself as a companion piece and supplement to Schopenhauer's 
philosophy, and with increasing explicitness it renounces the loftier 
ambition of becoming a companion piece and supplement to human 
knowledge and science. And not only is it the whole secretive splendour 
of this philosophy - which would also have attracted a Cagliostro58 -
that draws him to this, but the particular gestures and affects of the 
philosophers were always seducers as well! Wagner is Schopenhauerian, 
for example, in his exasperation over the corruption of the German 
55 'The principle of individuation'. Schopenhauer believed that the reality of the universe was an 
undifferentiated Will which however appeared to us as a world of distinct things subject to the 
'principle of individuation'. Ibid., vol. I, Book 2, § 23, and vol. I, Book 4, § 68 
56 Ibid., vol. I I, Book 4, § 49 
57 The third opera in Wagner's four-part cycle Der Ring des Nibe/ungen tells the story of the hero 
Siegfried, who can be taken to represent an energetic, unspoiled humanity of the future. 
58 Notorious eighteenth-century charlatan 
96 

Book Two 
language;59 even, however, if one should approve of Wagner's imitation 
of Schopenhauer in this point, one must not conceal the faet that 
Wagner's style itself suffers rather seriously from all those ulcers and 
tumours whose sight so enraged Schopenhauer. Regarding the Wagner­
ians who write German, Wagnerianism is starting to prove as dangerous 
as any Hegelianism ever has. Wagner is Schopenhauerian in his hatred 
of the Jews, to whom he is unable to do justice even in their greatest 
deed; after all, the Jews are the inventors of Christianity. 60 Wagner is 
Schopenhauerian in his attempt to conceive of Christianity as a seed of 
Buddhism that has drifted far and to prepare a Buddhistic age for 
Europe, with an occasional reconciliation with Catholic-Christian for­
mulas and sentiments. 61 Wagner is Schopenhauerian when he preaches 
mercy in our relations with animals; as we know, Schopenhauer's 
predecessor in this was Voltaire, who may also, like his successors, have 
known to disguise his hatred of certain things and persons as mercy 
towards animals.62 At least Wagner's hatred of science, which finds 
expression in his preaching, certainly does not come from a spirit of 
mercy and goodness - any more, obviously, than it does from any spirit 
at all. In the end, the philosophy of an artist is of little significance if it is 
merely an afterthought (eine nachtriigliche Philosophie) and does not 
harm the art itself. One cannot be too careful to avoid bearing ill will 
against an artist for an occasional, perhaps very unfortunate and 
presumptuous masquerade; let us not forget that, without exception, 
our dear artists are to some extent actors and have to be, and that 
59 Wagner: 'Bericht an Seine Majestat den Konig Ludwig Il. von Bayern iiber eine in Miinchen zu 
errichtende deutsche Musikschule'; Schopenhauer: 'Uber Schriftstellerei und Stil' in his 
Parerga und Paralipomena (vol. II, chapter 23) 
60 Wagner: Das Judentum in der Musik (1850); Schopenhauer: 'Zur Rechtslehre und Politik' in 
Parerga und Paralipomena (vol. II, chapter 9, § 132) Oews should have civil rights, but it is 
'absurd' to grant them rights of political participation), 'Uber die Universitats-Philosophie' in 
Parerga und Paralipomena (vol. 1) (One of the major defects of 'modem' philosophy, especially 
that of Hegel, is that it has imposed on itself the task of arguing for the truth of a 'Jewish 
mythology') etc. 
61 Wagner: Religion und Kunst (1880); Schopenhauer: World as Will and Representation, vol. II, 
Book 4, §41 
62 Wagner, Religion und Kunst (1880). In Aet I of Parsifal Gurnemanz lectures the young Parsifal 
on the evils of killing animals. Schopenhauer, 'Preisschrift iiber die Grundlage der Moral'§ 19. 
In this essay, as generally, Schopenhauer connects proto-animal-liberation views with anti­
Semitism (see above, Book II, footnote 60), arguing that Europeans treat animals badly because 
the Old Testament posits an absolute distinction between animals and humans, and claiming 
that anyone not 'chloroformed by thefoetor Iudaicus Uewish stench]' would see that animals and 
humans were essentially the same and thus should be treated with similar compassion. 
97 

The Cay Science 
without acting they would hardly be able to hold out very long. Let us 
remain faithful to Wagner in what is true and original in him - and 
especially, as his disciples, by remaining faithful to ourselves in what is 
true and original in us. Let us leave him his intellectual tempers and 
cramps; let us, in all fairness, ask what strange kinds of nourishment 
and needs an art like his may require in order to be able to live and grow! 
It doesn't matter that as a thinker he is so often wrong; justice and 
patience are not for him. Enough that his life is justified before itself and 
remains justified - this life which shouts at every one of us: 'Be a man 
and do not follow me - but yourself! Yourself!'63 Our life, too, shall be 
justified before ourselves! We too shall freely and fearlessly, in innocent 
selfishness, grow and blossom from ourselves! And as I contemplate 
such a person, the following sentences still come to mind today as they 
did before: 'That passion is better than Stoicism and hypocrisy; that 
being honest even in evil is better than losing oneself to the morality of 
tradition; that the free man can be good as well as evil, but the unfree 
man is a disgrace to nature and has no share in heavenly or earthly 
comfort; finally that everyone who wants to be free must become so through 
himself, and that freedom does not fall into anyone's lap as a wondrous 
gift' (Richard Wagner in Bayreuth, p. 94). 64 
100 
Learning how to pay homage. - Men have to learn to pay homage just as 
they have to learn to feel contempt. Anyone who breaks new paths and 
has led many people onto new paths <liseovers with amazement how 
clumsy and poor those many are at expressing their gratitude; indeed, 
how seldom gratitude is able to express itself at all. It is as though 
whenever gratitude wants to speak, something gets caught in her throat 
so that she just clears her throat and falls silent clearing her throat. The 
way in which a thinker comes to sense the effects of his thoughts and 
their reorganizing and unsettling power is almost a comedy; it seems at 
times as if those who have been affected basically feel insulted and can 
63 Goethe's highly overwrought novel The Sufferings of Young Werther tells the story of a young 
man who is unhappy in love and shoots himself. When real young men began dressing and 
acting like Werther, and a few actually shot themselves, citing his example, Goethe decided he 
needed to intervene and had these words placed as a motto before the second edition of the text 
(1775). 
64 Nietzsche quotes from his own essay orginally published as part of Untimely Meditations (1876). 
98 

Book Two 
only express what they take to be their threatened independence 
through a welter of incivilities. Entire generations are needed to invent 
merely a polite convention for thanks; and only very late comes that 
time when even gratitude has acquired a kind of spirit and genius; by 
then, someone is usually also around to be the great recipient of the 
gratitude, not only for what good he himself has done, but mostly for 
what his predecessors have slowly heaped up as a treasure of the highest 
and hest. 
101 
Voltaire.65 - Wherever there was a court, there were laws of good speech 
and thus also laws of style for all who wrote. The language of the court, 
however, is the language of the courtier, who has no area of expertise and 
who forbids himself convenient technical expressions even in conversa­
tion about scientific marters because they smack of areas of expertise; 
that is why, in countries with a courtly culture, technical expressions 
and everything that betrays a specialist is considered a stylistic blemish. 
Now that all courts have become caricatures of past and present, one is 
amazed to find even Voltaire unspeakably inflexible and punctilious on 
this point (for example in his judgement of such stylists as Fontenelle 66 
and Montesquieu 67) - for we are all emancipated from courtly taste, 
while Voltaire perfected it! 
102 
A word to the philologists. - That there are books so valuable and regal 
that entire generations of scholars are well employed when, through 
their eff orts, these books are preserved in a pure and intelligible state -
philology exists to reinforce this faith again and again. It presupposes 
that there is no dearth of those rare human beings (even if one doesn't 
see them right away) who really knowhow to use such valuable books -
probably those who themselves write or could write such books. I mean 
that philology presupposes a noble faith - that for the sake of a few who 
always 'will come' but are not there, a very great deal of painstaking, 
65 See above, Book 1, footnote 27, p. 55 and Book II, footnote 49, p. 95. 
66 See above, Book 1, footnote 3, p. 3 r. 
67 French political theorist (1689-1755) 
99 

The Cay Science 
even unclean work first needs to be done: it 1s all work in usum 
Delphinorum. 68 
IOJ 
On German music. - Today German music is, more than any other, the 
music of Europe only because it alone has given expression to the 
transformation that Europe underwent through the Revolution: only 
German composers know how to lend expression to animated masses of 
people; how to create that enormous artificial noise that doesn't even 
have to be very loud - whereas for example Italian opera knows only 
choruses of servants or soldiers, but not 'people'. 69 Moreover, in all 
German music one can hear a deep bourgeois envy of nobility, especially 
of esprit and elegance as expressions of a courtly, knightly, old, self­
assured society. This music is not like that of Goethe's singer before the 
gate, which also pleases 'in the great hall' and actually pleases the king; 
the idea is not 'The knights looked bravely thither, and the fair down at 
their laps'. 70 Even grace (Grazie) does not appear in German music 
without pangs of conscience; only in the presence of native charm 
(Anmut), the rustic sister of grace, does the German begin to feel wholly 
moral - and from that point on increasingly so, all the way up to his 
rapturous, erudite, often gruff 'sublimity', the sublimity of Beethoven. 
If you want to picture the human being for this music, well, just imagine 
Beethoven as he appears beside Goethe - say, at their encounter at 
Teplitz: 71 as semi-barbarism beside culture, as the people beside 
nobility, as the good-natured human being next to the good and more 
than merely 'good' human being, as the visionary beside the artist, as 
68 The eldest son of the King of France and heir apparent to the throne was called 'the Dauphin'. 
In order to ensure that his son received the best education possible the French king Louis XIV 
had a special edition of Greek and Latin authors made 'in usum Delphini' (i.e. 'for the use of the 
Dauphin'). This edition deleted passages from the works that were considered objectionable for 
one reason or another. /n usum Delphinorum means 'for the use ofDauphins'. 
69 This is an extraordinary statement, which must reflect Nietzsche's selective view of Italian 
opera. In particular, the chorus of Hebrew slaves from Verdi's Nabucco (1842), 'Va pensiero', 
became one of the most famous patriotic songs of the Italian Risorgimento. 
70 Poem by Goethe from his novel Wilhelm Meister, Book I I, chapter r r. 
71 Goethe and Beethoven, walking together in the spa town of Teplitz, encountered the Empress 
and her entourage. The staunch republican Beethoven tried to get Goethe to follow his example 
of not making way for the Imperial Suite, but Goethe, who was for decades an official at the 
small German court of Weimar, politely stepped aside and removed his hat as the Empress 
passed. 
IOO 

Book Two 
the man in need of comfort next to the man who is comforted, as the 
exaggerating and suspicious man next to the fair-minded, as the moody 
self-tormentor, the foolishly ecstatic, the blissfully unhappy, the guile­
lessly immoderate, as the presumptuous and crude - and all in all, the 
'untamed human being': 72 that is how Goethe himself experienced and 
characterized him - Goethe, the exception among Germans for whom 
no music of equal rank has yet been found! Consider finally whether the 
ever more widely reaching contempt for melody and the atrophy of the 
melodic sense among Germans can be understood as a democratic 
boorishness and after-effect of the Revolution. For melody has such an 
open joy in lawfulness and such a revulsion towards everything that is 
inchoate, unformed, and arbitrary that it sounds like a strain from the 
old order of things European and like a seduction and return to it. 
104 
On the sound of the German language. - We know where the German 
comes from that for a few centuries has been accepted as literary 
German. The Germans, with their reverence for everything that came 
from the court, have deliberately taken the chanceries as their model in 
everything they had to write, such as letters, documents, wills, and so 
forth. To write in the style of the chanceries was to write like the courts 
and the government - that was something distinguished compared to 
the German spoken in the city in which one happened to live. 
Eventually one drew the consequences and started to speak the way one 
wrote - thus one became even more discriminating in word formations, 
in the choice of words and phrases, and finally also in sound: one 
affected a courtly tone when speaking, and in the end the affectation 
became natural. Perhaps nothing like this has happened anywhere else: 
the triumph of written style over speech and the affectai:ion and 
pomposity of a whole people as the foundation of a common language 
that is no longer a mere conjunction of dialects. I believe that the sound 
of the German language in the middle ages, and especially in the time 
after the middle ages, was deeply rustic and vulgar; in the last few 
centuries it has become a bit more refined, primarily because one felt 
compelled to imitate so many French, ltalian, and Spanish sounds -
72 Goethe describes Beethoven thus in a letter to the former's friend Zelter of 2 September 1812. 
101 

The Cay Science 
particularly on the part of the German (and Austrian) nobility, which 
could in no way be content with the mother tongue. But despite this 
exercise, German must have sounded unbearably vulgar to Montaigne 
or even Racine; and to this day, in the mouth of travellers even in the 
midst of an Italian rabble, it sounds very coarse and hoarse, as if it 
originated in the back woods in smoky cabins and rude regions. I note 
today that among the former admirers of the chanceries a similar 
yearning for refinement of sound is spreading, and that the Germans 
are starting to obey a most peculiar 'acoustic spell' which could, in the 
long run, become a real <langer to the German language - for one would 
seek in vain to find more abhorrent sounds in Europe. Something 
scornful, cold, indifferent, careless in one's voice: that is what sounds 
'refined' to Germans today - and I hear the good will to this refinement 
in the voices of young officials, teachers, women, merchants; even little 
girls are starting to imitate this officers' German. For the officer -
specifically the Prussian officer - is the inventor of these sounds: this 
same officer who as military man and specialist possesses that admirable 
tact of modesty which all Germans could stand to learn (including 
German professors and musicians!). But as soon as he speaks and 
moves, the German officer is the most immodest and distasteful figure 
in old Europe - quite unselfconsciously, without any doubt! Nor are the 
good Germans conscious of this when they admire him as the man of 
the foremost and most distinguished society and gladly let him 'set 
the tone'. And so he does! First it is the sergeants and the non­
commissioned officers who imitate and coarsen his tone. Just listen to 
the shouted commands that positively surround German cities with a 
roar now that they drill outside all the gates: what presumptuousness, 
what raging sense of authority, what scornful coldness reverberates from 
this roar! Are the Germans really supposed to be a musical people? It is 
certain that the Germans are becoming militarized in the sound of their 
language; it is probable that once they have got used to speaking in a 
military tone, they will eventually also start writing that way. For being 
used to certain sounds has a profound effect on character - one soon has 
the words and phrases, and finally also the thoughts that fit this sound! 
Maybe the Germans already write like officers; maybe I just read too 
little of what is written in Germany. But one thing I know more 
certainly: the public German proclamations that also reach other 
countries are inspired not by German music but by this new sound of a 
I02 

Book Two 
distasteful presumptuousness. In almost every speech of the foremost 
German statesman, and even when he lets himself be heard only 
through his imperial mouthpiece, 73 is an accent that repels with revul­
sion the ear of a foreigner. But the Germans endure it - they endure 
themselves. 
IOS 
The Germans as artists. - When the German really works up a passion 
(and not merely the usual goodwill to passion!), he behaves as he must, 
and thinks no further about his behaviour. But the truth is that his 
behaviour is then very clumsy and ugly, as if lacking in tact and melody, 
so that the spectators merely have their own feelings of embarrassment 
or pathos and nothing more - unless he elevates himself into that state of 
sublimity and rapture, of which many passions are capable. Then even 
the German becomes beautiful! An idea of the height at which beauty first 
begins to pour its magic even over Germans drives the German artists 
into the heights and superheights and excesses of passion: in other 
words, a genuinely deep desire to rise beyond, at least look beyond, the 
ugliness and clumsiness - to a better, lighter, more southern, sunnier 
world. And so their cramps are often just indications that they would 
like to dance: these poor bears in which hidden nymphs and sylvan gods 
are at work - and at times still higher deities! 
rn6 
Music as advocate - 'I am thirsting for a master composer', said an 
innovator to his disciple, 'who can learn my thoughts from me and 
hereafter speak them in his language: that way I will better penetrate 
into people's ears and hearts. With tones one can seduce people into 
every error and every truth: who could refute a tone?' - 'So you would 
like to be considered irrefutable?' said his disciple. The innovator 
replied: 'I wish for the sprout to become a tree. For a teaching to 
become a tree, it has to be believed for a good while; for it to be believed, 
it has to be considered irrefutable. The tree needs storms, doubts, 
73 This probably refers to Chancellor Bismarck ('foremost statesman') and Emperor Wilhelm I 
('imperial mouthpiece'). 
103 

The Cay Science 
worms, and malice in order to reveal the nature and strength of its 
sprout; may it break if it is not strong enough! But a sprout can only be 
destroyed - not refuted!' When he had said that, his disciple cried 
impetuously: 'But I believe in your cause and consider it so strong that I 
will say everything, everything that I still have on my mind against it'. 
The innovator laughed to himself and wagged a finger at him. 'This 
kind of discipleship', he said, 'is the best, but it is dangerous and not 
every kind of teaching can withstand it'. 
107 
Our ultimate gratitude to art. - Had we not approved of the arts and 
invented this type of cult of the untrue, the insight into general untruth 
and mendacity that is now given to us by science - the insight into 
delusion and error as a condition of cognitive and sensate existence -
would be utterly unbearable. Honesty would lead to nausea and suicide. 
But now our honesty has a counterforce that helps us avoid such 
consequences: art, as the goodwill to appearance. We do not always keep 
our eyes from rounding off, from finishing off the poem; and then it is 
no longer eternal imperfection that we carry across the river of 
becoming - we then f eel that we are carrying a goddess, and are pro ud 
and childish in performing this service. As an aesthetic phenomenon 
existence is still bearable to us, and art furnishes us with the eye and 
hand and above all the good conscience to be able to make such a 
phenomenon of ourselves. At times we need to have a rest from 
ourselves by looking at and down at ourselves and, from an artistic 
distance, laughing at ourselves or crying at ourselves; we have to 
discover the hero no less than the Joof in our passion for knowledge; we 
must now and then be pleased about our folly in order to be able to stay 
pleased about our wisdom! And precisely because we are at bottom 
grave and serious human beings and more weights than human beings, 
nothing does us as much good as the fool's cap: we need it against 
ourselves - we need all exuberant, floating, dancing, mocking, childish, 
and blissful art lest we lose that freedom over things that our ideal 
demands of us. It would be a re lapse for us, with our irritable honesty, to 
get completely caught up in morality and, for the sake of the overly 
severe demands that we there make on ourselves, to become virtuous 
monsters and scarecrows. We have also to be able to stand above morality 

Book Two 
- and not just to stand with the anxious stiffness of someone who is 
afraid of slipping and falling at any moment, but also to float and play 
above it! How then could we possibly do without art and with the fool? -
And as long as you are in any way ashamed of yourselves, you do not yet 
belong amongst us! 
IOS 

Book Three 

Book Three 
108 
New battles. -After Buddha was dead, they still showed his shadow in a 
cave for centuries - a tremendous, gruesome shadow. God is dead; but 
given the way people are, there may still for millennia be caves in which 
they show his shadow. - And we - we must still def eat his shadow as 
well! 
109 
Let us beware. - Let us beware of thinking that the world is a living 
being. Where would it stretch? What would it feed on? How could it 
grow and procreate? After all, we know roughly what the organic is; are 
we then supposed to reinterpret what is inexpressibly derivative, late, 
rare, accidental, which we perceive only on the crust of the earth, as 
something essential, common, and eternal, as those people do who call 
the universe an organism? This nauseates me. Let us beware even of 
believing that the universe is a machine; it is certainly not constructed 
to one end, and the word 'machine' pays it far too high an honour. Let 
us beware of assuming in general and everywhere anything as elegant as 
the cyclical movements of our neighbouring stars; even a glance at the 
Milky Way raises doubts whether there are not much coarser and more 
contradictory movements there, as well as stars with eternally linear 
paths, etc. The astral order in which we live is an exception; this order 
and the considerable duration that is conditioned by it have again made 
possible the exception of exceptions: the development of the organic. 
The total character of the world, by contrast, is for all eternity chaos, 
not in the sense of a lack of necessity but of a lack of order, organization, 
form, beauty, wisdom, and whatever else our aesthetic anthropomorph­
isms are called. Judged from the vantage point of our reason, the 
unsuccessful attempts are by far the rule; the exceptions are not the 
secret aim, and the whole musical mechanism repeats eternally its tune, 
which must never be called a melody - and ultimately even the phrase 
'unsuccessful attempt' is already an anthropomorphism bearing a 
reproach. But how could we reproach or praise the universe! Let us 
beware of attributing to it heartlessness or unreason or their opposites: 
it is neither perfect, nor beautiful, nor noble, nor does it want to become 
any of these things; in no way does it strive to imitate man! In no way do 
!09 

The Cay Science 
our aesthetic and moral judgements apply to it! It also has no drive to 
self-preservation or any other drives; nor does it observe any laws. Let 
us beware of saying that there are laws in nature. There are only 
necessities: there is no one who commands, no one who obeys, no one 
who transgresses. Once you know that there are no purposes, you also 
know that there is no accident; for only against a world of purposes does 
the word 'accident' have a meaning. Let us beware of saying that death 
is opposed to life. The living is only a form of what is dead, and a very 
rare form. Let us beware of thinking that the world eternally creates 
new things. There are no eternally enduring substances; matter is as 
much of an error as the god of the Eleatics.1 But when will we be done 
with our caution and care? When will all these shadows of god no longer 
darken us? When will we have completely de-deified nature? When may 
we begin to naturalize humanity with a pure, newly discovered, newly 
redeemed nature? 
110 
Origin of knowledge. - Through immense periods of time, the intellect 
produced nothing but errors; some of them turned out to be useful and 
species-preserving; those who hit upon or inherited them fought their 
fight for themselves and their progeny with greater luck. Such erro­
neous articles of faith, which were passed on by inheritance further and 
further, and finally almost became part of the basic endowment of the 
species, are for example: that there are enduring things; that there are 
identical things; that there are things, kinds of material, bodies; that a 
thing is what it appears to be; that our will is free; that what is good for 
me is also good in and for itself. Only very late did the deniers and 
doubters of such propositions emerge; only very late did truth emerge 
as the weakest form of knowledge. It seemed that one was unable to live 
with it; that our organism was geared for its opposite: all its higher 
functions, the perceptions of sense and generally every kind of sensa­
tion, worked with those basic errors that had been incorporated since 
time immemorial. Further, even in the realm of knowledge those 
propositions became the norms according to which one determined 
'true' and 'untrue' - down to the most remote areas of pure logic. Thus 
1 Group of philosophers in the early fifth century B c who argued that the world of change was a 
mere appearance of an underlying unchanging being 
IIO 

Book Three 
the strength of knowledge lies not in its degree of truth, but in its age, its 
embeddedness, its character as a condition of life. Where life and 
knowledge seem to contradict each other, there was never any serious 
fight to begin with; denial and doubt were simply considered madness. 
Those exceptional thinkers, like the Eleatics, who still posited and clung 
to the opposites of the natural errors, believed in the possibility of also 
living this opposite: they invented the sage as the man of unchange­
ability, impersonality, universality of intuition, as one and all at the same 
time, with a special capacity for that inverted knowledge; they had the 
faith that their knowledge was at the same time the principle of lift. But 
in order to be able to claim all this, they had to deceive themselves about 
their own state: they had fictitiously to attribute to themselves imper­
sonality and duration without change; they had to misconstrue the 
nature of the knower, deny the force of impulses in knowledge, and 
generally conceive reason as a completely free, self-originated activity. 
They closed their eyes to the faet that they, too, had arrived at their 
propositions in opposition to what was considered valid or from a desire 
for tranquillity or sole possession or sovereignty. The subtler develop­
ment of honesty and scepticism finally made also these people impos­
sible; even their life and judgements proved dependent on the ancient 
drives and fundamental errors of all sentient existence. This subtler 
honesty and scepticism arose wherever two conflicting propositions 
seemed to be applicable to life because both were compatible with the 
basic errors, and thus where it was possible to argue about the greater or 
lesser degree of usefulness for life; also wherever new propositions 
showed themselves to be not directly useful, but at least also not 
harmful, as expressions of an intellectual play impulse, and innocent 
and happy like all play. Gradually the human brain filled itself with such 
judgements and convictions; and ferment, struggle, and lust for power 
developed in this tangle. Not only utility and delight, but also every 
kind of drive took part in the fight about the 'truths'; the intellectual 
fight became an occupation, attraction, profession, duty, dignity -
knowledge and the striving for the true finally took their place as a need 
among the other needs. Henceforth, not only faith and conviction, but 
also scrutiny, denial, suspicion, and contradiction were a power; all 'evil' 
instincts were subordinated to knowledge and put in its service and took 
on the lustre of the permitted, honoured, useful and finally the eye and 
the innocence of the good. Thus knowledge became a part of life and, as 
I II 

The Cay Science 
life, a continually growing power, until finally knowledge and the 
ancient basic er rors struck against each other, both as lif e, both as 
power, both in the same person. The thinker - that is now the being in 
whom the drive to truth and those lif e-preserving er rors are fighting 
their first battle, after the drive to truth has proven itself to be a life­
preserving power, too. In relation to the significance of this battle, 
everything else is a matter of indifference: the ultimate question about 
the condition of life is posed here, and the first attempt is made here to 
answer the question through experiment. To what extent can truth 
stand to be incorporated? - that is the question; that is the experiment. 
III 
The origin of the logical. - What is the origin of logic in man's head? 
Surely it arose out of the illogical, the realm of which must originally 
have been immense. But innumerable beings drew inferences in a way 
different from that in which we do now perished; nonetheless, they 
might have been doser to the truth! He, for instance, who did not know 
how to find 'identity' aften enough, both with regard to nourishment 
and to hostile animals - that is, he who subsumed too slowly and was 
too cautious in subsumption - had a slighter probability of survival 
than he who in all cases of similarity immediately guessed that they 
were identical. The predominant disposition, however, to treat the 
similar as identical - an illogical disposition, for there is nothing 
identical as such - is what first supplied all the foundations for logic. 
Similarly, in arder for the concept of substance to originate, which is 
indispensable to logic though nothing real corresponds to it in the 
strictest sense, it was necessary that for a long time changes in things 
not be seen, not be perceived; the beings who did not see things exactly 
had a head start over those who saw everything 'in a flux'. As such, 
every great degree of caution in inferring, every sceptical disposition, is 
a great <langer to life. No living being would be preserved had not the 
opposite disposition - to affirm rather than suspend judgement, to err 
and make things up rather than wait, to agree rather than deny, to pass 
judgement rather than be just - been bred to become extraordinarily 
strong. The course of logical thoughts and inferences in our brains 
today corresponds to a process and battle of drives that taken separately 
are all very illogical and unjust; we usually experience only the outcome 
112 

Book Three 
of the battle: that is how quickly and covertly this ancient mechanism 
runs its course in us. 
112 
Cause and effect. - We call it 'explanation', but 'description' is what 
distinguishes us from older stages of knowledge and science. We are 
better at describing - we explain just as little as all our predecessors. We 
have uncovered a diverse succession where the naive man and investi­
gator of older cultures saw only two different things, 'cause' and 'effect', 
as they said; we have perfected the picture of becoming but haven't got 
over, got behind the picture. The series of 'causes' faces us much more 
completely in each case; we reason, 'this and that must precede for that 
to follow' - but we haven't thereby understood anything. The specifically 
qualitative aspect for example of every chemical process, still appears to 
be a 'miracle', as does every locomotion; no one has 'explained' the 
push. And how could we explain! We are operating only with things that 
do not exist - with lines, surfaces, bodies, atoms, divisible times, 
divisible spaces. How is explanation to be at all possible when we first 
turn everything into a picture - our picture! It is enough to view science 
as an attempt to humanize things as faithfully as possible; we learn to 
describe ourselves more and more precisely as we describe things and 
their succession. Cause and effect: there is probably never such a 
duality; in truth a continuum faces us, from which we isolate a few 
pieces, just as we always perceive a movement only as isolated points, 
i.e. do not really see, but infer. The suddenness with which many effects 
stand out misleads us; it is a suddenness only for us. There is an infinite 
number of processes that elude us in this second of suddenness. An 
intellect that saw cause and effect as a continuum, not, as we do, as 
arbitrary division and dismemberment - that saw the stream of the 
event - would reject the concept of cause and effect and deny all 
determinedness. 
113 
On the doctrine of poisons. - So much has to come together in order for 
scientific thought to originate, and all these necessary forces have had to 
be separately invented, practised, cultivated! In their separateness they 
113 

The Cay Science 
have, however, very often had a totally different effect from that which 
they have today when in the realm of scientific thought they mutually 
limit and keep each other in check: they have worked as poisons, e.g. the 
doubting drive, the denying drive, the waiting drive, the collecting 
drive, the dissolving drive. Many hecatombs of human beings had to be 
sacrificed before these drives learned tograsp their coexistence and feel 
like functions of one organizing force in one human being! And how far 
we still are from the time when artistic energies and the practical 
wisdom of life join with scientific thought so that a higher organic 
system will develop in relation to which the scholar, the physician, the 
artist, and the lawmaker, as we now know them, would have to appear as 
paltry antiquities! 
I 14 
The scope of the moral. - As soon as we see a new picture, we immediately 
construct it with the help of all the old experiences we have had 
depending on the degree of our honesty and justice. There are no experi­
ences other than moral ones, not even in the realm of sense perception. 
115 
The Jour errors. - Man has been educated by his errors: first, he saw 
himself only incompletely; secondly, he endowed himself with fictitious 
attributes; thirdly, he placed himself in a false rank order in relation to 
animals and nature; fourthly, he invented ever new tables of goods and 
for a time took them to be eternal and unconditioned - so that now this, 
now that human drive and condition occupied first place and was 
ennobled as a result of this valuation. If one discounts the effect of these 
four errors, one has also discounted humanity, humaneness, and 'human 
dignity'. 
116 
Herd instinct. - Wherever we encounter a morality, we find an evaluation 
and ranking of human drives and actions. These evaluations and 
rankings are always the expression of the needs of a community and 
herd: that which benefits it the most - and second most, and third most 

Book Three 
- is also the highest standard of value for all individuals. With morality 
the individual is instructed to be a function of the herd and to ascribe 
value to himself only as a function. Since the conditions for preserving 
one community have been very different from those of another commu­
nity, there have been very different moralities; and in view of essential 
changes in herds and communities, states and societies that are yet to 
come, one can prophesy that there will yet be very divergent moralities. 
Morality is herd-instinct in the individual. 
117 
Herd pangs of conscience. - During the longest and most remote periods 
of time there was a kind of pang of conscience completely different from 
that which exists now. Today one feels responsible only for what one 
wants and does, and finds one's pride in oneself: all our teachers of 
justice start from this feeling of self and pleasure in the individual (des 
Einzelnen), as if the spring of justice (des Rechts)2 had always arisen here. 
But for the longest period of humanity's existence there was nothing 
more frightful than feeling alone (einzeln). To be alone (allein), to 
experience things by oneself (einzeln), to neither obey nor rule, to 
represent an individual (ein Individuum bedeuten) - that was no pleasure 
back then, but a punishment; one was sentenced 'to be an individual 
(Individuum)'. Freedom of thought was considered discomfort itself. 
While we experience law and conformity as compulsion and loss, one 
formerly experienced egoism as a painful thing, as an actual affiiction. 
To be a self, to estimate oneself according to one's own measure and 
weight - that was contrary to taste in those days. The inclination to this 
would have been considered madness, for every misery and every f ear 
were associated with being alone (Alleinsein). Back then, 'free will' had 
bad conscience as its closest neighbour. The more unfreely one acted, 
the more the herd instinct and not the sense of self spoke through the 
action, the more moral one considered oneself. In those days, everything 
that hurt the herd, whether the individual had willed it or not, gave the 
individual pangs of conscience - and his neighbour as well; indeed, the 
whole herd! On this point we have relearned most of all. 
2 The German word 'Recht' is usually ambiguous, meaning both 'right' and 'law'. In this case it 
seems best to render it as 'justice'. 
IIS 

The Cay Science 
118 
Benevolence. - Is it virtuous when a cell transforms itself into a function 
of a stronger cell? It has to. And is it evil when the stronger cell 
assimilates the weaker? It also has to; this is necessary for it, since it 
strives for superabundant replenishment and wants to regenerate itself. 
Accordingly one should make a distinction in benevolence between the 
drive to appropriate and the drive to submit, depending on whether it is 
the stronger or the weaker who experiences it. Joy and desire go together 
in the stronger, who wants to transform something into a function of 
himself; joy and the wish to be desired go together in the weaker, who 
wants to become a function. Compassion is essentially the former, a 
pleasant stirring of the drive to appropriate at the sight of the weaker; 
however, we must still keep in mind that 'strong' and 'weak' are relative 
concepts. 
119 
No altruism! - In many people I see a surplus strength and pleasure in 
wanting to become a function; they press towards and have the most 
delicate sense for all places where precisely they can be a function. Here 
belong those women who turn themselves into some function of a man 
that is especially weakly developed in him, and to that extent become his 
purse or his politics or his sociability. Such beings preserve themselves 
hest when they insert themselves into another organism; if they do not 
succeed at this, they become cranky, irritated, and devour themselves. 
120 
Health of the soul. - The popular medical formulation of morality ( the 
originator of which is Ariston of Chios), 'virtue is the health of the 
soul' ,3 would, in order to be useful, have to be changed at least to read, 
'your virtue is the health of your soul'. For there is no health as such, 
and all attempts to define such a thing have failed miserably. Deciding 
what is health even for your body depends on your goal, your horizon, 
your powers, your impulses, your mistakes and above all on the ideals 
3 Ariston li ved in the third century B c. This is fragment number 359 in Stoicorum veterum 
fragmenta, ed. von Arnim. 
II6 

Book Three 
and phantasms of your soul. Thus there are innumerable healths of the 
body; and the more one allows the particular and incomparable to rear 
its head again, the more one unlearns the dogma of the 'equality of 
men', the more the concept of a normal health, along with those of a 
normal diet and normal course of an illness, must be abandoned by our 
medical men. Only then would it be timely to reflect on the health and 
illness of the soul and to locate the virtue peculiar to each man in its 
health - which of course could look in one person like the opposite of 
health in another. Finally, the great question would still remain whether 
we can do without illness, even for the development of our virtue; and 
whether especially our thirst for knowledge and self-knowledge do not 
need the sick soul as much as the healthy; in brief, whether the will to 
health alone is not a prejudice, a cowardice and a piece of most refined 
barbarism and backwardness. 
121 
Life not an argument. - We have arranged for ourselves a world in which 
we are able to live - by positing bodies, lines, planes, causes and effects, 
motion and rest, form and content; without these articles of faith no one 
could endure living! But that does not prove them. Life is not an 
argument; the conditions of lif e might include error. 
122 
Moral scepticism in Christianity. - Christianity, too, has made a great 
contribution to enlightenment: it taught moral scepticism in an extre­
mely trenchant and effective way - accusing, embittering, but with 
untiring patience and refinement; it annihilated in every single man the 
faith in his 'virtues'. It caused those great virtuous men, of whom there 
was no dearth in antiquity, to disappear forever from the face of the 
earth - those popular men who with a faith in their own perfection went 
about with the dignity of a toreador. When we now, educated in this 
Christian school of scepticism, read the moral books of antiquity, e.g. 
those of Seneca or Epictetus, 4 we feel an amusing superiority and are 
full of secret insights and overviews, as if a child were speaking before 
4 Two stoic philosophers: Seneca (first century AD) was a wealthy member of the Roman ruling 
class. Epictetus (late first/early second century) was a freed Greek slave. 
117 

The Cay Science 
an old man or an overenthusiastic young beauty were speaking before 
La Rochefoucauld: 5 we know better what virtue is! In the end, however, 
we have applied this same scepticism also to all religious states and 
procedures, such as sin, repentance, grace, sanctification; and we have 
all allowed the worm to dig so deeply that even when reading Christian 
books we now have the same feeling of refined superiority and insight: 
we also know the religious feelings better! And it is time to know them 
well and to describe them well, for even the pious of the old faith are 
dying out: let us save their image and their type at least for knowledge! 
123 
Knowledge more than a means. - Even without this new passion - I mean 
the passion for knowledge - science would be promoted: up to now 
science has grown and matured without it. The good faith in science, 
the prejudice in its favour that rules our modem states (and formerly 
even the Church), is essentially based on the faet that this unconditional 
tendency and urge has manifested itself in science so rarely and that 
science is specifically regarded not as a passion but as a condition and 
'ethos'. lndeed, often mere amour-plaisir6 of knowledge (curiosity) is 
sufficient, or amour-vanite,7 being accustomed to it with the ulterior 
motive of honour and bread; it is even enough for many that they have a 
surplus of leisure and do not know what to do with it except read, 
collect, arrange, observe, recount - their 'scientific drive' is their 
boredorn. Pope Leo X8 once (in his brief to Beroaldus)9 sang the praise 
of science: he designated it the most beautiful ornament and the greatest 
pride of our life, a noble occupation in happiness and unhappiness; 
'without it', he says finally, 'all human undertakings would lack a firm 
hold - indeed, even with it they are changeable and unstable enough!' 
But this fairly sceptical pope keeps silent, like all other churchly 
eulogists of science, his final judgement on science. Although one might 
5 The Rejlections of La Rochefoucauld (1613-80) contain a wealth of exceptionally astute and 
disillusioned observations about human action and motivation. 
6 'the love which is pleasure' 
7 'the love which is vanity'. Nietzsche takes the distinction between amour-plaisir and amour-vanite 
from Stendhal (see above, Book 11, footnote 42, p. 92) who actually distinguishes four kinds of 
love; see his De /'amour, chapter 1. 
8 Originally Giovanni de' Medici (1475-1521), elected to the Papacy in 1513; very active patron of 
the arts 
9 Minor ltalian humanist (1472-1518) 
II8 

Book Three 
infer from his words that he places science above art - strange as this 
may be for such a friend of the arts - in the end it is nothing but 
politeness when he does not speak of what he, too, places high above all 
science: 'revealed truth' and the 'eternal salvation of the soul'. Com­
pared to that, what are ornaments, pride, entertainment, and the 
security of life to him! 'Science is something second-class; nothing 
ultimate, unconditional; not an object of passion' - this judgement was 
held back in Leo's soul: the truly Christian judgement about science! In 
antiquity the dignity and recognition of science were diminished by the 
faet that even among her most zealous disciples the striving for virtue 
took first place, and that one thought one had given knowledge one's 
highest praise when one celebrated it as the best means to virtue. It is 
something new in history that knowledge wants to be more than a 
means. 
124 
In the horizon of the infinite. - We have forsaken the land and gone to 
sea! We have destroyed the bridge behind us - more so, we have 
demolished the land behind us! Now, little ship, look out! Beside you is 
the ocean; it is true, it does not always roar, and at times it lies there like 
silk and gold and dreams of goodness. But there will be hours when you 
realize that it is infinite and that there is nothing more awesome than 
infinity. Oh, the poor bird that has felt free and now strikes against the 
walls of this cage! Woe, when homesickness for the land overcomes you, 
as if there had been morefreedom there - and there is no more 'land'! 
125 
The madman. - Haven't you heard of that madman who in the bright 
morning lit a lantern and ran around the marketplace crying incessantly, 
'I'm looking for God! l'm looking for God!' Since many of those who 
did not believe in God were standing around together just then, he 
caused great laughter. Has he been lost, then? asked one. Did he lose his 
way like a child? asked another. Or is he hiding? Is he afraid of us? Has 
he gone to sea? Emigrated? - Thus they shouted and laughed, one 
interrupting the other. The madman jumped into their midst and 
pierced them with his eyes. 'Where is God?' he cried; 'I'll tel1 you! We 
Il9 

The Cay Science 
have kil/ed him - you and I! Wc are all his murderers. But how did wc do 
this? How were wc able to drink up the sea? Who gave us the spange to 
wipe away the entire horizon? What were wc doing when wc unchained 
this earth from its sun? Where is it moving to now? Where are wc 
moving to? Away from all suns? Are wc not continually falling? And 
backwards, sidewards, forwards, in all directions? Is there still an up and 
a down? Aren't wc straying as though through an infinite nothing? Isn't 
empty space breathing at us? Hasn't it got colder? Isn't night and more 
night coming again and again? Don't lanterns have to be lit in the 
morning? Do wc still hear nothing of the noise of the grave-diggers who 
are burying God? Do wc still smell nothing of the divine decomposi­
tion? - Gods, too, decompose! God is dead! God remains dead! And wc 
have killed him! How can wc console ourselves, the murderers of all 
murderersl The holiest and the mightiest thing the world has ever 
possessed has bled to death under our knives: who will wipe this blood 
from us? With what water could wc clean ourselves? What festivals of 
atonement, what holy games will wc have to invent for ourselves? Is the 
magnitude of this deed not too great for us? Do wc not ourselves have to 
become gods merely to appear worthy of it? There was never a greater 
deed - and whoever is horn af ter us will on account of this deed belong 
to a higher history than all history up to now!' Here the madman fell 
silent and looked again at his listeners; they too were silent and looked 
at him disconcertedly. Finally he threw his lantern on the ground so 
that it broke into pieces and went out. 'I come too early', he then said; 
'my time is not yet. This tremendous event is still on its way, wandering; 
it has not yet reached the ears of men. Lightning and thunder need 
time; the light of the stars needs time; deeds need time, even after they 
are done, in arder to be seen and heard. This deed is still more remote 
to them than the remotest stars - and yet they have done it themselves!' It 
is still recounted how on the same day the madman forced his way into 
several churches and there started singing his requiem aeternam deo.10 
Led out and called to account, he is said always to have replied nothing 
but, 'What then are these churches now if not the tombs and sepulchres 
of God?' 
10 'Grant God eternal rest.' A transformation of that part of the service for the dead which reads 
'Requiem aeternam dona eis [scilicet, mortuis], Domine' ('Lord, grant them [the dead] eternal 
rest') 
120 

Book Three 
126 
Mystical explanations - Mystical explanations are considered deep; the 
truth is, they are not even shallow. 
127 
Afiereffects of the oldest religiosity. - Every thoughtless person believes 
that the will alone is effective; that willing is something simple, 
absolutely given, underivable, and intelligible in itself. When he does 
something, e.g. strikes something, he is convinced that it is he who is 
striking, and that he did the striking because he wanted to strike. He 
does not even notice a problem here; the feeling of will suffices for him 
to assume cause and effect, but also to believe that he understands their 
relation. He knows nothing of the mechanism of what happened and the 
hundredfold delicate work that has to be done to bring about the strike, 
or of the incapacity of the will as such to do even the slightest part of 
this work. The will is to him a force that works by magic: the belief in 
the will as the cause of eff ects is the belief in forces that work by magic. 
Now, originally man believed, wherever he saw something happen, that 
a will had to be the cause and that beings with a personal will had to be 
operating in the background - the concept of mechanics was quite 
foreign to him. But since man believed for immense periods of time 
only in persons (and not in substances, forces, things, etc.), the faith in 
cause and effect has become for him the fundamental faith that he uses 
everywhere something happens - still today instinctively and as an 
atavism of the oldest origin. The propositions, 'no effect without a 
cause', 'every effect again a cause', appear as generalizations of much 
narrower propositions: 'no effecting without willing'; 'it is possible to 
have an effect only on willing beings'; 'no suffering of an effect is ever 
pure and without consequences, but all suffering is an agitation of the 
will' (towards action, defence, revenge, retribution) - but in the 
prehistory of humanity the former and latter propositions were iden­
tical: the former were not generalizations of the latter, but the latter 
were elucidations of the former.11 With his assumption that only that 
which wills exists, Schopenhauer enthroned a primordial mythology; he 
11 See Schopenhauer, 'Uber die vierfache Wurzel des Satzes vom zureichenden Grunde' (1813). 
121 

The Cay Science 
seems never to have attempted an analysis of the will because like 
everyone else he believed in the simplicity and immediacy of all willing -
whereas willing is actually such a well-practised mechanism that it 
almost escapes the observing eye. Against him I offer these propositions: 
first, in order for willing to come about, a representation of pleasure or 
displeasure is needed. Secondly, that a violent stimulus is experienced as 
pleasure or pain is a matter of the interpreting intellect, which, to be 
sure, generally works without our being conscious of it (uns unbewuf]t); 
and one and the same stimulus can be interpreted as pleasure or pain. 
Thirdly, only in intellectual beings do pleasure, pain, and will exist; the 
vast majority of organisms has nothing like it. 
128 
The value of prayer. - Prayer has been invented for people who never 
really have thoughts of their own and who know no elevation of the soul 
or do not notice it if it occurs: what are such people to do in sacred 
places or in all important situations in life that demand calm and a kind 
of dignity? In order that they at least do not disturb, the wisdom of all 
founders of religions, small as well as great, has prescribed to them the 
formulas of prayer as a long mechanical work of the lips, combined with 
exertion of the memory and a same fix ed pos ture of bands and f eet and 
eyes! So they may, like the Tibetans, go ahead regurgitating their 'om 
mane padme hum' 12 countless times or, as in Benares, count the name 
of the god off their fingers, Ram-Ram-Ram 13 (and so on, with or 
without charm), or honour Vishnu with his thousand names, 14 or Allah 
with his ninety-nine; or they may use prayer-mills and rosaries - the 
main point is that this work keeps them still for a time and makes them 
a tolerable sight: their type of prayer has been invented for the benefit of 
the pious who know thoughts and elevations of their own. And even 
they have their tired hours, when a string of venerable words and 
sounds and a mechanical piety do them good. But supposing these rare 
human beings - in every religion the religious person is an exception -
can figure out what to do; those who are poor in spirit cannot figure out 
12 This is a formula which adepts repeat in certain forms of Buddhist meditation as a help to 
attaining spiritual enlightenment. The literal meaning seems to be something like: 'You 
[Buddha] the centre of the lotus-flower'. 
13 The god of a monotheistic Hindu cult centred in Benares 
14 One ofthe major gods ofthe Hindu pantheon 
122 

Book Three 
what to do, and to forbid them their prayer-rattling is to deprive them 
of their religion - as Protestantism increasingly shows us more and 
more. From such people religion wants only that they keep still with 
their eyes, hands, legs, and other organs; thus they are made beautiful 
for a time and - more like human beings! 
129 
The conditions for God. - 'God himself cannot exist without wise 
people', said Luther, 15 and with good reason; but 'God can exist even 
less without unwise people' - that our good Luther did not say! 
130 
A dangerous decision. - The Christian decision to find the world ugly and 
bad has made the world ugly and bad. 
131 
Christianity and suicide. - When Christianity came into existence the 
inclination to suicide was very strong - Christianity turned it into a 
lever of its power: it allowed only two kinds of suicide, dressed them up 
with the highest dignity and the highest hopes and forbade all others in 
a terrible manner. But martyrdom and the ascetic's slow suicide were 
permitted. 
132 
Against Christianity. - What decides against Christianity now is our 
taste, not our reasons. 
133 
Principle. - An inescapable hypothesis to which humanity must have 
recourse again and again is still more powerful in the long run than the 
IS This passage in Luther's work has not been located. 
123 

The Cay Science 
best believed faith in something untrue (such as the Christian faith). In 
the long run: that means here a hundred thousand years. 
134 
Pessimists as victims. - Wherever a deep dissatisfaction with existence 
comes to prevail, it is the aftereff ects of some great dietary mistake 
made by a people over a long time that are coming to light. Thus the 
spread of Buddhism (not its origin) depended greatly on the Indians' 
excessive and almost exclusive diet of rice and the general enervation 
resulting from it. Perhaps the modem European discontent is due to the 
faet that our prehistory, the entire middle ages, was given to drinking 
thanks to the influence of Germanic tastes on Europe: the middle ages 
means the alcohol poisoning of Europe. - The German dissatisfaction 
with life is essentially a winter sickness exacerbated by the effects of 
cellar air and the noxious stove fumes in German living rooms. 
1 35 
Origin of sin. - Sin, as it is now experienced wherever Christianity 
reigns or once reigned: sin is a Jewish feeling and a Jewish invention; 
and given that this is the background of all Christian morality, 
Christianity can be said to have aimed at 'Judaizing' the whole world. 
The extent to which this has succeeded in Europe is best brought out 
by how alien Greek antiquity - a world without feelings of sin - strikes 
our sensibility as being, despite all the good will expended by entire 
generations and many excellent individuals to approach and incorporate 
this world. 'Only when you repent does God have mercy on you' - to a 
Greek, that is an object of ridicule and an annoyance; he would say, 
'Maybe slaves feel that way.' What is here being presupposed is a being 
who is powerful, supremely powerful and yet enjoys revenge: his power 
is so great that no harm whatsoever can be done unto him except in 
marters of honour. Every sin is an injury of respect, a crimen laesae 
majestatis divinae 16 - and nothing further! Feeling spiritually crushed, 
degraded, wallowing in the dust - that is the first and last condition of 
16 The Roman legal code contained a provision for punishing a crime called crimen laesae maiestatis 
which originally seems to have meant denigrating or insulting the honour and dignity of the 
Roman people. The phrase Nietzsche uses would mean: 'crime of insulting the dignity of god'. 
124 

Book Three 
his grace; in sum, restoration of his di vine honour! Whether the sin has 
done any other harm; whether it has planted some deep, growing 
calamity that seizes and strangles one person after another like a 
disease; this honour-craving Oriental couldn't care less: sin is an assault 
on him, not on humanity! He gives those to whom he grants his grace 
also this same nonchalance about the natural consequences of sin. God 
and humanity are here conceived as so separate and opposite that there 
can basically be no sin against humanity - every deed is supposed to be 
considered only with respect to its supernatural consequences, not with 
respect to its natural consequences; that is what Jewish feeling, to which 
everything natural is indignity itself, demands. The Greeks, by contrast, 
were doser to the thought that even sacrilege can have dignity - even 
theft, as in the case of Prometheus; 17 even the slaughter of cattle as the 
expression of an insane envy, as in the case of Ajax:18 in their need to 
incorporate into and devise some dignity for sacrilege, they invented 
tragedy - an art form and a pleasure that has remained utterly and 
profoundly foreign to the Jew, despite all his poetic talent and inclina­
tion towards the sublime. 
136 
The chosen people. -The Jews, who feel they are the chosen people of all 
peoples precisely because they are the moral genius of all peoples 
(owing to their ability more profoundly to despise the human being in 
themselves than any other people) - the Jews take a pleasure in their 
divine monarch and the holy which is similar to that which the French 
nobility took in Louis XIV. This nobility had surrendered all its power 
and sovereignty and had become contemptible: in arder not to feel this, 
in arder to be able to forget this, there was a need for a royal splendour, 
a royal authority and plenitude of power without equal to which only the 
nobility had access. In rising to the height of the court by virtue of this 
privilege and seeing from there everything as beneath oneself, as 
17 Demi-god who is said to have stolen fire from the gods and to have given it to humans, thereby 
initiating the process of civilization. An extant tragedy ascribed to Aeschylus treats the punish­
ment of Prometheus for this crime: he was fettered to a rock in the Caucasus while an eagle fed 
on his liver. See above, Book I, footnote 1, p. 29 and also below, § 300, p. 170. 
is Because of a slight to his standing as a warrior, Ajax went mad and killed a large number of 
cattle, deludedly thinking they were the Greek leaders who had wronged him. Sophocles treats 
this subject in his tragedy Ajax. 
125 

The Cay Science 
contemptible, one got over an irritable conscience. Thus one deliber­
ately built the tower of royal power ever higher into the clouds and 
staked on it the ultimate building stones of one's own power. 
137 
Speaking in a parable. - A Jesus Christ was possible only in a Jewish 
landscape - I mean one over which the gloomy and sublime thunder 
clouds of the wrathful Jehovah hovered continually. Here alone was the 
rare and sudden piercing of a single sunbeam through the gruesome 
general and perpetual day-night experienced as a miracle of 'love', as 
the ray of the most undeserved 'grace'. Only here could Christ dream of 
his rainbow and his heavenly }adder on which God descended to man; 
everywhere else good weather and sunshine were too much of a rule and 
everyday occurrence. 
Christ's error. - The founder of Christianity thought that there was 
nothing from which men suffered more than their sins. That was his 
error - the error of one who felt himself free of sin and who lacked 
experience of it! Thus his soul filled itself with that wonderful fantastic 
compassion for a torment that was rarely a very great torment even 
among his people, who invented sin! But the Christians have found a 
way of retroactively vindicating their master and of sanctifying his error 
into 'truth'. 
139 
The colour of the passions. - People like St Paul have an 'evil eye' for the 
passions: they come to know only what is dirty, disfiguring, and heart­
breaking about them; hence their ideal impulse seeks the annihilation of 
the passions, which they see totally purified in the divine. Quite unlike 
St Paul and the Jews, the Greeks turned their ideal impulse precisely 
towards the passions and loved, elevated, gilded and deified them; 
evidently passion made them feel not only happier but also purer and 
more divine than usual. And the Christians? Did they want to become 
Jews in this respect? Did they perhaps succeed? 
126 

Book Three 
140 
Too Jewish. - If God wanted to become an object of love, he should first 
of all have had to give up judging and justice: a judge, even a merciful 
one, is no object of love. The founder of Christianity lacked delicacy of 
feeling in this regard, being a Jew. 
141 
Too oriental. - What? A god who loves men provided that they believe 
in him and who casts evil gazes and threats at anyone who does not 
believe in this love? What? A love hemmed in by conditions as the 
feeling of an almighty god? A love that has not even mastered the feeling 
of honour and roused vengefulness? How oriental this all isl 'If I love 
you, what does that concern you?'19 is surely a sufficient critique of all 
of Christianity. 
142 
lncense. - Buddha says: 'Don't flatter your benefactors!' Repeat this 
saying in a Christian church and it will instantly clear the air of 
everything Christian. 
143 
The greatest advantage of polytheism. - For an individual to posit his own 
ideal and to derive from it his own law, joys and rights - that may well 
have been considered hitherto to be the most outrageous of human 
aberrations and idolatry itself; indeed, the few who dared it always felt 
the need to apologize to themselves, usually as follows: 'Not I! Not I! 
But a god through me!' The wonderful art and power of creating gods -
polytheism - was that through which this drive could discharge itself, 
purify, perfect and ennoble itself; for originally it was a base and 
undistinguished drive, related to stubbornness, disobedience, and envy. 
To be hostile to this drive to have one's own ideal: that was formerly the 
law of every morality. There was only one norm: 'the human being' -
19 Goethe, Wilhelm Meister, Book IV, chapter 9; Dichtung und Wahrheit, Book III, chapter 14 
127 

The Cay Science 
and every people believed itself to have this one and ultimate norm. But 
above and outside oneself, in a distant overworld, one got to see a 
plurality of norms: one god was not the denial of or anathema to another 
god! Here for the first time one allowed oneself individuals; here one 
first honoured the rights of individuals. The invention of gods, heroes, 
and overmen ( Ubermenschen) of all kinds, as well as deviant or inferior 
forms of humanoid life (Neben- und Untermenschen), dwarfs, fairies, 
centaurs, satyrs, demons, and devils, was the invaluable preliminary 
exercise for the justification of the egoism and sovereignty of the 
individual: the freedom that one conceded to a god in his relation to 
other gods one finally gave to oneself in relation to laws, customs, and 
neighbours. Monotheism, in contrast, this rigid consequence of the 
teachings of a normal human type - that is, the belief in a normal god 
next to whom there are only false pseudo-gods - was perhaps the 
greatest <langer to humanity so far: it threatened us with that premature 
stagnation which, as far as we can tell, most other species have long 
reached; for all of them believe in one normal type and ideal for their 
species and have translated the morality of custom (Sittlichkeit der Sitte) 
definitively into flesh and blood. In polytheism the free-spiritedness and 
many-spiritedness of humanity received preliminary form - the power 
to create for ourselves our own new eyes and ever again new eyes that 
are ever more our own - so that for humans alone among the animals 
there are no eternal horizons and perspectives. 
1 44 
Religious wars. - The greatest progress of the masses up till now has 
been the religious war, for it proves that the mass has begun to treat 
concepts with respect. Religious wars start only when the finer quarrels 
among sects have refined common reason so that even the mob becomes 
subtle and takes trifles seriously, and actually considers it possible that 
the 'eternal salvation of the soul' might hinge on slight differences 
between concepts. 
145 
Danger for vegetarians. - A diet consisting primarily of rice leads to the 
use of opium and narcotics, just as a diet consisting primarily of potatoes 
128 

Book Three 
leads to the use of liquor. But its subtler effects also include ways of 
thinking and feeling that work narcotically. This harmonizes with the 
faet that the promoters of narcotic ways of thinking and feeling, like 
those Indian gurus, praise precisely a diet that is purely vegetarian and 
would like to make that a law of the masses: thus they want to call forth 
and increase a need that they are able to satisfy. 
German hopes. - Let us not forget that names of peoples are usually 
termsofabuse. The Tartars, for example, are literally 'the dogs'; that is 
what the Chinese called them. The 'Germans': this originally meant 
'heathen'; that is what the Goths after their conversion named the great 
mass of their unbaptized kindred tribes, in accordance with their 
translation of the Septuagint 20 in which the heathens were designated 
with a word that in Greek means 'the nations'; see Ulfilas.21 It would 
still be possible for the Germans to turn the term of abuse for them into 
a name of honour by becoming the first un-Christian nation in Europe: 
for which Schopenhauer honoured them as having a very strong 
predisposition. That would be a way of fulfilling the words of Luther, 
who taught them to be un-Roman and to say: 'Here I stand! I can do no 
other!'22 
147 
Question and answer. - What do savage tribes today take over first of all 
from the Europeans? Liquor and Christianity, the narcotics of Europe. 
And from what do they perish most quickly? From European narcotics. 
20 Translation of the Old Testament into Greek for the use of Greek-speaking Jews, produced 
between the third century B c and the beginning of the Christian era 
21 A fourth-century (AD) Gothic bishop who is responsible for the translation of the Bible into 
Gothic. Nietzsche is claiming that the German word for 'German' (deutsch) is etymologically 
related to the Gothic word thuida ('people'), and that Ulfilas used this word to render the Greek 
',u rnvri' in the Septuagint which originally just meant 'nations', but came to be used by 
Christians to refer specifically to 'heathens'. Nietzsche discusses this paragraph of the text in his 
letter to Peter Gast of 30 July 1882. 
22 Probably apocryphal reply Luther is said to have given at the Diet ofWorms (18 April 1521) to 
the demand that he recant 
129 

The Cay Science 
Where reformations arise. - At the time of the great corruption of the 
Church, the Church in Germany was the least corrupt; that is why the 
Reformation occurred here, as a sign that even the beginnings of 
corruption were felt to be intolerable. For relatively speaking, no people 
has ever been more Christian than the Germans at the time of Luther; 
their Christian culture was ready to burst into a hundredfold splendour 
of blossoms - only one more night was needed, but this brought the 
storm that put an end to everything. 
149 
The failure of reformations. - That several attempts to found new Greek 
religions have failed testifies to the higher culture of the Greeks even in 
rather early times; it indicates that even early in Greece, there must 
have been many diverse individuals whose diverse plights could not be 
disposed of with a single prescription of faith and hope. Pythagoras23 
and Plato, perhaps Empedocles 24 as well, and the Orphic enthusiasts 25 
much earlier yet, were out to found new religions; and the former two 
had souls and talents which were so much those of founders of religions 
that one cannot wonder enough at their failure; yet all they managed to 
found were sects. Every time the reformation of an entire people fails 
and only sects raise their heads, one may conclude that the people is 
already very heterogeneous and is starting to break away from crude 
herd instincts and the morality of custom (Sittlichkeit der Sitte): a 
notable hovering condition which one usually disparages as decay in 
morals and corruption, when in faet it announces the maturation of the 
egg and the impending breaking of the eggshell. That Luther's reforma­
tion succeeded in the North is a sign of the faet that the North was 
backward in comparison to the South and still had rather uniform and 
monochrome needs; Europe would not have been christianized at all 
had not the culture of the old world of the South gradually been 
barbarized through an excessive admixture of Germanic barbarian 
23 See above, Book 11, footnote 23, p. 84. 
24 See above, Book 11, footnote 25, p. 84. 
25 Orphism was an obscure but powerful religious movement that seems to have originated in the 
sixth century B c. It was often associated with the view that the soul could live on after death. 
130 

Book Three 
blood and its cultural superiority lost. The more general and uncondi­
tional the influence of an individual or an individual's thought can be, 
the more homogeneous and the lower must the mass be that is 
influenced, while counter-movements betray inner counter-needs that 
also want satisfaction and recognition. Conversely, one may always infer 
a high level of culture when powerful and domineering natures only 
manage to have a slight and sectarian influence: this is also true of the 
individual arts and the areas of knowledge. Where there is ruling, there 
are masses; where there are masses, there is a need for slavery. Where 
there is slavery, there are few individuals, and these have herd instincts 
and conscience against them. 
Towards a critique of saints. - Must one then, in arder to have a virtue, 
want to have it in its most brutal form - the way the Christian saints 
wanted and needed it, as those who endured life only with the thought 
that the mere sight of their virtue would destroy the self-esteem of 
anyone who viewed it? But a virtue with such an effect I call brutal. 
151 
On the origin of religion. - The metaphysical need is not the origin of 
religion, as Schopenhauer 26 has it, but only a late ojfshoot of it. Under 
the rule of religious ideas, one has got used to the idea of 'another world 
(behind, below, above)' and feels an unpleasant emptiness and depriva­
tion at the annihilation of religious delusions - and from this feeling 
grows now 'another world', but this time only a metaphysical and nota 
religious one. But what led to the belief in 'another world' in primordial 
times was not a drive or need, but an error in the interpretation of 
certain natural events, an embarrassing lapse of the intellect. 
152 
The greatest change. - The lighting and colours of everything have 
changed! We no longer fully understand how the ancients experienced 
26 In his 'Uber Religion' in Parerga und Paralipomena, vol. II, chapter 15 
131 

The Cay Science 
what was most familiar and frequent - for example the day and waking. 
Because the ancients believed in dreams, waking lif e had a different 
light. The same goes for the whole of life, illuminated by a light radiated 
back on it from death and its significance: our 'death' is a completely 
different death. All experiences shone differently because a god glowed 
from them; all decisions and prospects concerning the distant future as 
well, for one had oracles and secret signs and believed in prophecy. 
'Truth' was formerly experienced differently because the lunatic could 
be considered its mouthpiece - which makes us shudder and laugh. 
Every injustice affected feelings differently, for one feared divine 
retribution and not just a civil punishment and dishonour. What was joy 
in an age when one believed in devils and tempters! What was passion 
when one saw the demons lurking nearby! What was philosophy when 
doubt was felt as a sin of the most dangerous kind, as a sacrilege against 
eternal love, as mistrust of everything that is good, lofty, pure, and 
merciful! We have given things a new colour; we keep on painting them 
- but what can we nowadays accomplish in comparison to the splendour 
of colour of that old master! I mean ancient humanity. 
153 
Homo poeta.27 - 'I myself, who most single-handedly made this tragedy 
of tragedies, insofar as it is finished; I, having first tied the knot of 
morality into existence and drawn it so tight that only a god can loosen 
it - which is what Horace demands!28 - I myself have now in the fourth 
aet slain all gods, out of morality! What is now to become of the fifth 
aet? From where shall I take the tragic solution? Should I start 
considering a comic solution?' 
154 
Different types of danger in life. - You have no idea what you are 
experiencing; you run through lif e as if you were drunk and once in a 
while fall down a staircase. But thanks to your drunkenness, you don't 
break your limbs in the process; your muscles are too slack and your 
27 'The human being as poet' 
28 Ars poetica, 189ff. 
132 

Book Three 
head too dull for you to find the stones of these stairs as hard as the rest 
of us do! For us, life is a greater <langer: we are made of glass - woe unto 
us if we bump against something! And everything is lost if we Jall! 
155 
What we lack. - We love what is great in nature and have discovered it -
because in our heads, great human beings are lacking. It was the other 
way around for the Greeks; their feeling for nature is different from 
ours. 
The most influential. - That a human being resists his whole age, stops it 
at the gate and demands an accounting - that must exercise an influence! 
Whether he wants to is irrelevant; that he can is what matters. 
157 
Mentiri. 29 - Watch out! He's thinking; in a moment he will have a lie 
ready. This is a stage of culture at which entire peoples have stood. Just 
consider what the Romans meant by the word mentiri! 
An uncomfortable trait. - To find all things deep - that is an uncomfor­
table trait: it makes one constantly strain one's eyes and in the end 
always find more than one had wished. 
159 
Every virtue has its age. - Whoever is unyielding these days will often 
have pangs of conscience because of his candour; for unyieldingness and 
candour are virtues that belongs to different ages. 
29 'to lie' (Latin); etymologically related to mens ('mind') and memini ('bear in mind', 'remember') 
133 

The Cay Science 
160 
Dealing with virtues. - To a virtue, too, one can be undignified and 
fawning. 
To the !overs of the age. - The ex-priest and the ex-convict constantly 
make faces: what they want is a face without a past. - But have you ever 
seen people who know that the future is mirrored in their faces and are 
so polite to you, you lovers of 'the age', that they make a face without a 
future? 
Egoism. - Egoism is the perspectival law of feeling according to which 
what is closest appears large and heavy, while in the distance everything 
decreases in size and weight. 
After a great victory. - The hest thing about a great victory is that it 
tak es the fear of def eat out of the victor. 'Why not also be defeated 
once?' he says to himself; 'I'm rich enough for that now.' 
The seekers of rest. - I recognize the spirits who seek rest by the many 
dark objects with which they surround themselves: he who wants to 
sleep makes his room dark or crawls into a cave. - A hint to those who 
don't know, but would like to know, what they actually seek most! 
On the happiness of those who renounce something. - He who thoroughly 
forgoes something for a long time will, upon accidentally re-encoun­
tering it, almost think he has discovered it - and what happiness every 
discoverer has! Let us be wiser than the snakes who lie too long in the 
same sunlight. 
1 34 

Book Three 
166 
Always in our company. - Everything that is of my kind, in nature and 
history, speaks to me, praises me, spurs me on, comforts me - every­
thing else I don't hear or forget right away. We are always only in our 
own company. 
Misanthropy and love. - One speaks of being sick of people only when 
one can no longer digest them and yet still has one's stomach full of 
them. Misanthropy is the result of an all-too-greedy love of man and 
'cannibalism' - but who told you to swallow men like oysters, my Prince 
Hamlet? 
168 
About a sick man. - 'He is doing badly!' - 'What's wrong?' - 'He is 
suffering from the desire to be praised and finds no nourishment for it.' 
- 'Unbelievable! The whole world is celebrating him, and pampering 
him; he is on everyone's lips.' - 'Yes, but he has a bad ear for praise. If a 
friend praises him, it sounds to him as if the friend is praising himsel( 
If an enemy praises him, it sounds to him as if the enemy wants be 
praised for that. And when finally he is praised by any of the rest - and 
they are not many at all; that is how famous he is! - it offends him that 
they don't want him as a friend or enemy; he likes to say: What do I care 
about people who are capable of trying to play "the just man" even 
towards me?' 
169 
Open enemies. - Courage before the enemy is one thing; it does not 
prevent one from being a coward and indecisive scatterbrain. That is 
how Napoleon judged 'the most courageous person' he knew: Murat. 30 
- Which shows that open enemies are indispensable to some people if 
they are to rise to their own kind of virtue, manliness, and cheerfulness. 
3° French general (1767-1815). Nietzsche takes the anecdote from his usual source about 
Napoleon, the Memoires ofMadame de Remusat (see above, Book 1, footnote 16, p. 49). 
135 

The Cay Science 
170 
With the crowd. - So far he is still running with the crowd and singing 
its praises, but one day he will become its opponent! For he is following 
it thinking that this will give his laziness full play, and he has not yet 
discovered that the crowd is not lazy enough for him! That it always 
pushes ahead! That it allows no one to stand still! - And he so much 
likes to stand still! 
171 
Farne. - When the gratitude of many towards one throws away all 
shame, farne arises. 
172 
The spoiler oftaste. -A: 'You are a spoiler of taste- that is what everyone 
says!' B: 'Of course! I spoil for everyone the taste for his own party -
and no party forgives that.' 
173 
Being deep and seeming deep. - Those who know they are deep strive for 
clarity. Those who would like to seem deep to the crowd strive for 
obscurity. For the crowd takes everything whose ground it cannot see to 
be deep: it is so timid and so reluctant to go into the water. 
174 
Aside. - Parliamentarianism, i.e. the public perm1ss1on to choose 
between five basic political opinions, flatters and wins the favour of all 
those who like to appear independent and individualistic and would like 
to fight for their opinions. In the end, however, it is irrelevant whether 
the herd is commanded to have one opinion or permitted to have five. 
Whoever deviates from the five public opinions and steps aside will 
always have the whole herd against him. 

Book Three 
175 
On eloquence. - Who has had the most convincing eloquence so far? The 
drum roll; and as long as kings and commanders have control over that, 
they will remain the best orators and rabble rousers. 
Compassion. - Those poor reigning princes! All their rights are now 
suddenly turning into claims, and all these claims soon begin to sound 
like presumptions! The moment they merely say 'We' or 'my people', 
wicked old Europe starts to smile. Verily, a chief master of ceremonies 
in the modem world would waste little ceremony on them and might 
perhaps decree: 'les souverains rangent aux parvenus.' 31 
177 
On 'the educational establishment'. - In Germany, higher men lack one 
great means of education: the laughter of higher men; for in Germany, 
these do not laugh. 
On moral enlightenment. - One must talk the Germans out of their 
Mephistopheles, and their Faust, too. They are two moral prejudices 
against the value ofknowledge. 32 
179 
Thoughts. - Thoughts are the shadows of our sensations - always darker, 
emptier, simpler. 
31 'sovereigns rank with parvenus' 
32 In Goethe's drama Faust, Mephistopheles is a 'spirit who always says "no"' (Aet I, line 1338); 
Faust seeks for an experienee so satisfying that he will wish time to stand still so that he ean hold 
on to it (Aet I, lines 1675-1706). 
137 

The Cay Science 
180 
The good age for free spirits. - Free spirits take liberties even with science 
- and for the time being, one also allows them to - as long as the 
Church is still standing! To that extent they now have their good age. 
Foliowing and leading. - A: 'Of these two, one will always follow and the 
other will always lead, wherever fate may take them. And yet the former 
is superior to the other in virtue and spirit!' B: 'And yet? And yet? That 
was said for the others, not for me, not for us! - Fit secundum regulam. '33 
In solitude. - When one lives alone, one neither speaks too loud nor 
writes too loud, for one fears the hollow echo - the criticism of the 
nymph Echo. And all voices sound different in solitude! 
The music of the best future. - I would consider the foremost musician to 
be the one who knew only the sadness of the deepest happiness, and no 
other sadness at all; there has never been such a musician. 
Justice. - l'd rather let myself be robbed than be surrounded by 
scarecrows - that is my taste. And in any case it is a matter of taste -
nothing more! 
Poor. - Today he is poor, not because they have taken everything away 
from him but because he has thrown everything away. What is that to 
him? He is used to finding things. It is the poor who misunderstand his 
voluntary poverty. 
33 'This takes place according to the rule.' 

Book Three 
186 
Bad conscience. - Everything he does now is upright and orderly - and 
still he has a bad conscience. For the extraordinary is his task. 
What is offensive in the presentation. - This artist offends me in the way 
he presents his ideas, his very good ideas: so broad and emphatic, and 
with such crude artifices of persuasion, as if he were speaking to a mob. 
Whenever we devote some time to his art, it is soon as if we were 'in bad 
company'. 
188 
Work. - How close work and the worker are now even to the most 
leisurely among us! The royal courtesy of the words 'We are all 
workers!' would still have been a cynicism and an indecency under the 
reign ofLouis XIV. 
The thinker. - He is a thinker: that means he knows how to make things 
simpler than they are. 
Against those who praise. - A: 'One is praised only by one's peers.' B: 
'Yes! And whoever praises you tells you: you are my peer!' 
191 
Against many a defence. - The most perfidious way of damaging a cause 
is deliberately to defend it with faulty arguments. 
192 
The good-natured. - What distinguishes those good-natured people 
whose faces radiate good will from the rest? They feel well in the 
1 39 

The Cay Science 
presence of another person and quickly fall in love with him; conse­
quently they wish him well, and their first judgement is: 'I like him.' In 
such people there is the following succession: the wish to appropriate 
(they do not scruple much over the worth of the other person), quick 
appropriation, delight in possession, and action for the benefit of the 
person possessed. 
193 
Kant's joke. - Kant wanted to prove, in a way that would dumbfound 
the whole world, that the whole world was right: that was the secret joke 
of this soul. He wrote against the scholars in favour of popular 
prejudice, but for scholars and not for the people. 
194 
The 'openhearted' one. - That person probably always acts according to 
secret reasons, for he always has communicable reasons on his tongue 
and virtually in his open hand. 
195 
Laughable. - Look! Look! He is running away from people, but they 
follow him because he is running ahead of them - that is how much they 
are a herd! 
Limits of our sense of hearing. - One hears only those questions to which 
one is able to find an answer. 
197 
Better be careful! - There is nothing we like so much to impart to others 
as the seal of secrecy - along with what is under it. 

Book Three 
Chagrin of the proud one. - The proud man feels chagrined even by those 
who bring him forward: he gives the horse of his carriage the evil eye. 
199 
Generosity. - With the rich, generosity is often just a type of shyness. 
200 
Laughter. - Laughter means: to gloat, but with a good conscience. 
201 
Applause. - In applause there is always a kind of noise - even in the 
applause we give ourselves. 
202 
A squanderer. - As yet he does not have that poverty of the rich man 
who has already counted his entire treasure once - he squanders his 
spirit with the unreason of a squandering nature. 
203 
Hic niger est.34 - Usually he has no thought - but on rare occasions bad 
thoughts come to him. 
204 
Beggars and courtesy. - 'One isn't being impolite if one uses a stone to 
knock on a door which lacks a doorbell': that is how beggars think, and 
everyone who is suff ering some kind of distress, but no one thinks they 
are right. 
34 'A dangerous man, this one' (literally 'This one is black'); Horace, Satires 4,85 

The Cay Science 
205 
Need. - Need is taken to be the cause why something came to be; in 
reality, it is often merely an effect of what has come to be. 
206 
When it rains. - It is raining, and I think of the poor who now huddle 
together with their many troubles and without any practice at concealing 
them: each is ready to hurt the other and to make for himself a pitiful 
kind of pleasure even when the weather is bad. That and that alone is 
the poverty of the poor! 
207 
The envious one. - He is envious - let's hope he won't have any children; 
he would envy them because he can no longer be a child. 
208 
Great mani - From the faet that someone is a 'great man' one cannot 
infer that he is a man; he may be just a boy, or a chameleon of all stages 
of life, or a bewitched little woman. 
209 
A way of asking for reasons. - There is a way of asking us for our reasons 
that not only makes us forget our best reasons but also awakens in us a 
defiance and resistance towards reasons in general - a very stultifying 
mode of asking and a trick used by tyrannical people! 
2IO 
Moderation in diligence. - One should not try to surpass one's father in 
diligence; that makes one sick. 
21 I 
Secret enemies. - To be able to afford a secret enemy- that is a luxury for 
which the morality even of elevated spirits is usually not rich enough. 
142 

Book Three 
212 
Not to let oneself be deceived. - His spirit has bad manners, is hasty and 
always stutters out of impatience; hence one hardly recognizes how 
much stamina and robustness the soul possesses in which this spirit 
dwells. 
213 
The road to happiness. - A wise man asked a fool what the road to 
happiness is. The latter replied without delay, like someone being asked 
the way to the nearest town: 'Admire yourself and live on the street!' 
'Stop,' replied the sage, 'you are asking too much; it is quite enough to 
admire oneself!' The fool countered: 'But how can one constantly 
admire without constantly feeling contempt?' 
214 
Faith makes blessed. - Virtue gives happiness and a type of blessedness 
only to those who have not lost faith in their virtue - not to those 
subtler souls whose virtue consists of a deep mistrust of themselves and 
of all virtue. So in the end, here, too, 'faith makes blessed' 35 - and, mind 
you, not virtuel 
215 
Ideal and material. - You envisage a noble ideal, but are you such a noble 
stone that such a divine image could be fashioned out of you? And 
anyway - isn't all your work a barbarous sculpting? A blasphemy against 
your ideal? 
216 
Danger in the voice. - With a very loud voice in one's throat one is almost 
incapable of thinking subtle things. 
35 Gospel according to Mark 16. 16 
143 

The Cay Science 
217 
Cause and effect. - Before the effect one believes in causes different from 
those one believes in after the eff ect. 
218 
My antipathy. - I do not love people who have to explode like bombs in 
order to have any effect whatsoever and in whose presence one is always 
in <langer of suddenly losing one's hearing - or more. 
219 
The purpose of punishment. - The purpose of punishment is to improve 
the one who punishes; that is the last resort of the apologists for 
punishment. 
220 
Sacrifice. - The sacrificial animal thinks differently about sacrifice than 
the spectator, but one has never let it have its say. 
221 
Forbearance. - Fathers and sons have much more forbearance for each 
other than mothers and daughters. 
222 
Poet and liar. - The poet sees in the liar a foster brother (Milchbruder) 
whose milk he has drunk up; that is why the latter has remained stunted 
and miserable and has not even got as far as having a good conscience. 
223 
Vicariousness of the senses. - 'Our eyes are also intended for hearing', said 
the old father confessor who had gone deaf, 'and among the blind he is 
king who has the longest ears.' 
144 

Book Three 
224 
Animals' criticism. - I fear that the animals see man as a being like them 
who in a most dangerous manner has lost his animal common sense - as 
the insane animal, the laughing animal, the weeping animal, the miser­
able animal. 
225 
The natura!. - 'Evil has always had great effects in its favour! And 
nature is evil! Let us therefore be natural!' That is the secret reasoning 
of the great effect-artists of humanity, who have all too often been 
considered great human beings. 
226 
The distrustful and style. - We say the strongest things simply, provided 
that we are among people who believe in our strength - such an 
environment breeds 'simplicity of style'. The distrustful speak emphati­
cally; the distrustful make emphatic. 
227 
Bad inference; bad shot. - He cannot control himself; from that, a woman 
infers that it would be easy to control him and casts her net for him -
the poor woman who will shortly be his slave. 
228 
Against mediators. - He who wants to mediate between two resolute 
thinkers shows that he is mediocre: he has no eye for what is unique; 
seeing things as similar and making things the same is the sign of weak 
eyes. 
229 
Obstinacy andfaithfulness. - From defiance he clings to something he has 
come to see through, but he calls it 'faithfulness'. 
145 

The Cay Science 
230 
Lack of silence. - His whole being fails to persuade - that is because he 
has never remained silent about any of his good deeds. 
231 
The 'thorough '. - Those who are slow to know think that slowness is an 
aspect of knowledge. 
232 
Dreaming. - Either one does not dream, or does so interestingly. One 
should learn to spend one's waking life in the same way: not at all, or 
interestingly. 
233 
The most dangerous point of view. - What I now do or omit is as important 
for everything that is to come as the greatest event of the past: seen from 
this tremendous perspective, from that of their effects, all actions 
appear equally great and small. 
234 
Words of comfort fora musician. - 'Your life does not reach men's ears; to 
them you live a mute life, and all the subtlety of melody, all tender 
resolution about following or leading, remain hidden from them. It is 
true: you are not coming down a main street with regimental music, but 
that does not give these good people the right to say your way of life 
lacks music. He who has ears to hear, let him hear!' 
2 35 
Spirit and character. - Some reach their peak as characters, but their 
spirit is not adequate for this height, while with others it is the other 
way around. 

Book Three 
236 
In order to move the crowd. - Must not he who wants to move the crowd 
be an actor playing the role of himself? Must he not first translate 
himself into the grotesquely obvious and present his entire person and 
cause in this coarsened and simplified version? 
237 
The polite one. - 'He is so polite!' - Yes, he always carries a cake for 
Cerberus 36 and is so timid that he takes everyone for Cerberus, even you 
and me; that is his 'politeness'. 
238 
Without envy. - He is quite without envy, but that has no merit because 
he wants to conquer a country that no ane has yet possessed and hardly 
anyone has ever seen. 
239 
The joyless one. - One single joyless person is enough to create constant 
sullenness and dark skies for a an entire household, and only a miracle 
can cause that ane person to be lackingl Happiness is not nearly as 
contagious a disease - why is that? 
240 
At the sea. - I wouldn't build a house for myself (and it is part of my 
good fortune not to be a home-owner!). But if I had to, I would, like 
same Romans, build it right into the sea - I certainly would like to share 
a few secrets with this beautiful monster. 
Work and artist. - This artist is ambitious, nothing more: ultimately his 
work is just a magnifying glass that he offers everyone who looks his way. 
36 Three-headed dog who guarded the gates to heil. It was thought that he could sometimes be 
mollified by being given a honey-cake. 
147 

The Cay Science 
242 
Suum cuique.37 - However great my greed for knowledge may be, I 
cannot take anything else out of things than what already belongs to me 
- what belongs to others remains behind. How is it possible fora human 
being to be a thief or a robber! 
243 
Origin of 'good' and 'bad'. - An improvement 1s invented only by 
someone who is able to feel 'this is not good'. 
244 
Thoughts and words. - Even one's thoughts one cannot entirely repro­
duce in words. 
245 
Praise by choice. - The artist chooses his subjects; that is his way of 
pra1smg. 
Mathematics. - Let us introduce the subtlety and rigour of mathematics 
into all sciences to the extent to which that is at all possible; not in the 
beliefthat we will come to know things this way, but in order to ascertain 
our human relation to things. Mathematics is only the means to general 
and final knowledge ofhumanity. 
247 
Habit. -Every habit makes our hand more witty and our wit less handy. 
Books. - What good is a hook that does not even carry us beyond all 
books? 
37 'To each his own'. Definition of justice found, for instance, in Cicero, De officiis 1. 1 5 

Book Three 
249 
The sigh of the one who comes to know. - 'Oh, my greed! In this soul there 
dwells no selflessness but rather an all-desiring self that would like, as it 
were, to see with the eyes and seize with the hands of many individuals 
- a self that would like to bring back the entire past, that wants to lose 
nothing it could possibly possess! Oh, this flame of my greed! Oh, that I 
might be reborn into a hundred beings!' - Whoever does not know this 
sigh from experience does not know the passion of coming to know. 
250 
Guilt. - Although the shrewdest judges of the witches and even the 
witches themselves were convinced of the guilt of witchcraft, this guilt 
still did not exist. This is true of all guilt. 
Misunderstood sufferers. - Great natures suffer differently from what 
their admirers imagine: they suffer most severely from the ignoble, 
petty agitations of some evil moments - in short, from their doubts 
about their own greatness - and not from the sacrifices and martyrdoms 
that their task demands from them. As long as Prometheus has pity for 
men and sacrifices himself for them, he is happy and great; but when he 
is envious of Zeus and the homage paid to him by mortals, then he 
suffers! 
Better in debt. - 'Better to remain in debt than to pay with a coin that 
does not bear our image!' says our sovereignty. 
2 53 
Always at home. - One day we reach our goal - and now we point with 
pride to the lang journeys we took to reach it. In truth we did not notice 
we were traveBing. But we got so far because at each point we believed 
we were at home. 
149 

The Cay Science 
254 
Against embarrassment. - Whoever is always deeply occupied is beyond 
all embarrassment. 
255 
Imitators. - A: 'What? You want no imitators?' B: 'I don't want people 
to imitate me; I want everyone to set his own example, which is what I 
do.' A: 'So -?' 
Skinnedness. - All people of depth find happiness in being for once like 
flying fish, playing on the outermost crests of waves; what they consider 
hest in things is that they have a surface: their skinnedness - sit venia 
verbo.38 
257 
From experience. - Some do not know how rich they are until they 
experience what kinds of rich people will steal from them. 
Those who deny chance. - No victor believes in chance. 
259 
From paradise. - 'Good and evil are the prejudices of God' - said the 
snake. 
260 
One timesone. - One is always wrong; but with two, truth begins. - One 
cannot prove his case, but two are already irrefutable. 
38 'if you allow rne to use this word' 

Book Three 
Originality. - What is originality? To see something that still has no 
name; that still cannot be named even though it is lying right before 
everyone's eyes. The way people usually are, it takes a name to make 
something visible at all. - Those with originality have usually been the 
name-g1vers. 
262 
Sub specie aeterni.39 - A: 'You are moving ever faster from the living: 
soon they will strike you out of their lists!' - B: 'That is the only way to 
participate in the privilege of the dead.' - A: 'What privilege?' - B: 'No 
longer to die.' 
Without vanity. - When we are in love we want our defects to remain 
hidden - not from vanity but so the loved one won't suffer. Yes, the 
lover would like to be godlike - also not from vanity. 
What we do. - What we do 1s never understood but always merely 
praised and reproached. 
265 
Ultimate doubt. - What, then, are man's truths ultimately? - They are 
the irrefutable errors of man. 
266 
Where cruelty is needed. - He who has greatness is cruel to his virtues 
and secondary considerations. 
39 'from the point of view of eternity' 

The Cay Science 
With a great goal. - With a great goal one is superior even to justice, not 
only to one's deeds and judges. 
268 
What makes one heroic? - To approach at the same time one's highest 
suffering and one's highest hope. 
269 
What do you believe in? - In this: that the weight of all things must be 
determined anew. 
270 
What does your conscience say?- 'You should become who you are. '40 
271 
Where lie your greatest dangers? - In compassion. 
272 
What do you love in others?- My hopes. 
273 
Whom do you call bad? - He who always wants to put people to shame. 
40 This is a slightly truncated version of a famous passage from a victory-ode by the early fifth­
century (se) poet Pindar, his Second Pythian Victory-Ode (line 73). The original Pindar passage 
reads: 'Become who you are through knowing'. The implication is that the ode should inform the 
victorious young aristocrat of the great deeds of his ancestors and thereby inspire him to live up 
to them. For Nietzsche the saying had deeper implications of self-discovery and self-realization: 
'How one becomes what one is' is the sub-title of Ecce Homo, his reflection on his own work, 
which was written in 1888. 

Book Three 
274 
What is most human to you?- To spare someone shame. 
275 
What is the seal of having become free? - No longer to be ashamed before 
oneself. 
153 

Book Four 
StJanuarius 
You who with your lances burning 
Melt the ice sheets of my soul, 
Speed it toward the ocean yearning 
For its highest hope and goal: 
Ever healthier it rises, 
Free in fate most amorous: -
Thus your miracle it prizes 
Fairest Januarius! 
Genoa in J anuary 1 882 
Januarius is the first month of the Roman civil calendar. The name might (or might not) be 
connected with that of the deity Janus, the god of doors and entrances. St Januarius (in ltalian 
San Gennaro) was an early Christian martyr, a via! of whose dried blood is kept in a church in 
Naples. On certain feast days the blood is said miraculously to become fluid again. 

Book Four: St Januarius 
For the new year. - I'm still alive; I still think: I must still be alive 
because I still have to think. Sum, ergo cogito: cogito, ergo sum.1 Today 
everyone allows himself to express his dearest wish and thoughts: so I, 
too, want to say what I wish from myself today and what thought first 
crossed my heart - what thought shall be the reason, warrant, and 
sweetness of the rest of my life! I want to learn more and more how to 
see what is necessary in things as what is beautiful in them - thus I will 
be one of those who make things beautiful. Amor fati:2 let that be my 
love from now on! I do not want to wage war against ugliness. I do not 
want to accuse; I do not even want to accuse the accusers. Let looking 
away be my only negation! And, all in all and on the whole: some day I 
want only to be a Yes-sayer! 
Personal providence. - There is a certain high point in life; once we have 
reached it we are, for all our freedom, once more in the greatest <langer 
of spiritual unfreedom; and no matter how much we have confronted 
the beautiful chaos of existence and denied it all providential reason and 
goodness, we still have to pass our hardest test. For it is only now that 
the thought of a personal providence confronts us with the most 
penetrating force and the hest advocate, appearance, speaks for it - now 
that we so palpably see how everything that befalls us continually turns 
out for the hest. Every day and every hour life seems to want nothing else 
than to prove this proposition again and again; be it what it may - bad 
or good weather, the loss of a friend, a sickness, slander, the absence of a 
letter, the spraining of an ankle, a glance into a shop, a counter­
argument, the opening of a hook, a dream, fraud - it shows itself 
immediately or very soon to be something that 'was not allowed to be 
lacking' - it is full of deep meaning and use precisely for us! Is there any 
more dangerous seduction than to renounce one's faith in the gods of 
Epicurus, 3 those carefree and unknown ones, and to believe instead in 
1 'I am, therefore I think: I think, therefore I am.' In the second of his Meditations, Descartes 
argued that as long as he thought he could be sure he existed. 
2 'love of (one's) fate' 
3 Epicurus thought common views about the gods were completely erroneous; they in faet lived a 
157 

The Cay Science 
some petty deity who is full of worries and personally knows every little 
hair on our heads and finds nothing nauseating in the most miserable 
small service? Well - I mean in spite of it all! - we should leave the gods 
alone as well as the genies at our service and be content with the 
assumption that our own practical and theoretical skill in interpreting 
and arranging events has now reached its apex. Nor should we think too 
highly of this dexterity of our wisdom when at times the wonderful 
harmony created by the playing of our instrument surprises us all too 
much - a harmony that sounds too good for us to dare to give credit to 
ourselves. Indeed, now and then someone plays with us - good old 
chance; occasionally chance guides our hand, and the wisest providence 
could not invent music more beautiful than what our foolish hand then 
produces. 
The thought of death. - It gives me a melancholy happiness to live in the 
midst of this jumble of Ianes, needs, and voices: how much enjoyment, 
impatience, desire; how much thirsty lif e and drunkenness of lif e comes 
to light every moment of the day! And yet things will soon be so silent for 
all these noisy, living, life-thirsty ones! How even now everyone's shadow 
stands behind him, as his dark fellow traveller! It's always like the last 
moment before the departure of an emigrant ship: people have more to 
say to each other than ever; the hour is late; the ocean and its desolate 
silence await impatiently behind all the noise - so covetous, so certain of 
its prey. And everyone, everyone takes the past to be little or nothing 
while the near future is everything; hence this haste, this clamour, this 
outshouting and out-hustling one another. Everyone wants to be the first 
in this future - and yet death and deathly silence are the only things 
certain and common to all in this future! How strange that this sole 
certainty and commonality barely makes an impression on people and 
that they are farthest removed from feeling like a brotherhood of death! It 
makes me happy to see that people do not at all want to think the thought 
of death! I would very much like to do something that would make the 
thought of life even a hundred times more worth being thought to them. 
perfectly happy and contented life, and this meant that they had no interest in or involvement 
with the human world at all. 

Book Four: St Januarius 
279 
Star friendship. - We were friends and have become estranged. But that 
was right, and we do not want to hide and obscure it from ourselves as if 
we had to be ashamed of it. We are two ships, each of which has its own 
goal and course; we may cross and have a feast together, as we did - and 
then the good ships lay so quietly in one harbour and in one sun that it 
may have seemed as if they had already completed their course and had 
the same goal. But then the almighty force of our projects drove us 
apart once again, into different seas and sunny zones, and maybe we will 
never meet again - or maybe we will, but will not recognize each other: 
the diff erent seas and suns have changed us! That we had to become 
estranged is the law above us; through it we should come to have more 
respect for each other - and the thought of our former friendship 
should become more sacred! There is probably a tremendous invisible 
curve and stellar orbit in which our different ways and goals may be 
included as small stretches - let us rise to this thought! But our life is too 
short and our vision too meagre for us to be more than friends in the 
sense of that sublime possibility. - Let us then believe in our star 
friendship even if we must be earth enemies. 
Architecture for those who wish to pursue knowledge. - One day, and 
probably soon, we will need some recognition of what is missing 
primarily in our hig cities: quiet and wide, expansive places for reflection 
- places with long, high-ceilinged arcades for bad or all-too-sunny 
weather, where no shouts or noise from carriages can penetrate and 
where refined manners would prohibit even priests from praying aloud: 
a whole complex ofbuildings and sites that would give expression to the 
sublimity of contemplation and of stepping aside. The time is past when 
the Church had a monopoly on contemplation, when the vita contempla­
tiva4 always had to be first and foremost a vita religiosa:5 and everything 
built by the Church gives expression to that idea. I do not see how we 
could make do with those buildings, even if they were stripped of their 
churchly purposes; as houses of God and spaces for ostentatiously 
4 'contemplative life' 
s 'religious life' 
159 

The Cay Science 
displaying our intercourse with the World-Beyond, these buildings 
speak much that is too emotional and too partisan for us godless ones to 
be able to think our thoughts here. We want to have us translated into 
stone and plants; we want to take walks in us when we stroll through 
these hallways and gardens. 
Knowing how to end. - Masters of the first rank are recognized by the 
faet that in matters great and small they know how to find an end 
perfectly, be it the end of a melody or a thought; of a tragedy's fifth aet 
or an aet of state. The hest of the second rank always get restless toward 
the end, and do not fall into the sea with such proud and calm balance as 
do, for example, the mountains at Portofino - where the bay of Genoa 
finishes its melody. 
Gait. - There are certain tricks of the spirit by which even great minds 
betray that they come from the mob or half-mob; the gait and stride of 
their thoughts especially plays the traitor: they cannot walk. Thus 
Napoleon too, was unable, to his great vexation, to walk in a princely 
and 'legitimate' fashion on occasions that really demanded it, such as 
great coronation processions; even there, he was always just the leader 
of a column - proud and hasty at the same time, and very conscious of 
it. It is laughable to behold those authors who make the ruffied robes of 
long sentences rustle about themselves: they are trying to bide their feet. 
Preparatory human beings. - I welcome all the signs of a more virile, 
warlike age approaching that will above all restore honour to bravery! 
For it shall pave the way for a still higher age and gather the strength 
that the latter will need one day - the age that will carry heroism into 
the search for knowledge and wage wars for the sake of thoughts and 
their consequences. To this end we now need many preparatory brave 
human beings who surely cannot spring from nothingness any more 
than from the sand and slime of present-day civilization and urbaniza-
160 

Book Four: St Januarius 
tion: human beings who know how to be silent, lonely, determined, and 
satisfied and steadfast in invisible activities; human beings profoundly 
predisposed to look, in all things, for what must be overcome; human 
beings whose cheerfulness, patience, modesty, and contempt for great 
vanities is just as distinctive as their magnanimity in victory and 
patience with the small vanities of the defeated; human beings with a 
sharp and free judgement concerning all victors and the share of chance 
in every victory and glory; human beings with their own festivals, their 
own working days, their own periods of mourning, accustomed to 
command with assurance and equally prepared, when called for, to obey 
- in each case, equally proud, equally serving their own cause; more 
endangered, more fruitful, happier human beings! For - believe me -
the secret for harvesting from existence the greatest fruitfulness and the 
greatest enjoyment is - to live dangerously! Build your cities on the 
slopes of Vesuvius! Send your ships into uncharted seas! Live at war 
with your peers and yourselves! Be robbers and conquerors as long as 
you cannot be rulers and possessors, you seekers of knowledge! Soon 
the time will be past in which you had to be content living bidden in 
forests like shy deer! Finally the search for knowledge will reach for its 
due; it will want to rule and possess, and you with it! 
Faith in oneself. - Few people have faith in themselves - and of these 
few, some possess it as a useful blindness or partial eclipse of the mind 
(what would they behold if they could see the bottom of themselves!), 
while the rest have to acquire it. Everything good, fine, or great they do 
is first of all an argument against the sceptic inside them. They have to 
convince or persuade him, and that almost requires genius. These are 
the great self-dissatisfied people. 
285 
Excelsior.6 - 'You will never pray again, never adore again, never again 
rest in endless trust; you refuse to let yourself stop to unharness your 
thoughts before any ultimate wisdom, goodness, or power; you have no 
perpetual guard and friend for your seven solitudes; you live without 
6 'higher' 
161 

The Cay Science 
the view of a mountain-range with snow-capped peaks and fire in its 
heart; there is no avenger for you anymore, no final corrector of the text 
of your lif e; there is no more reason in what happens, no love in what 
will happen to you; no more resting place stands open for your heart in 
which to find and no longer seek; you arm yourself against any ultimate 
peace; you will the eternal recurrence of war and peace; - Man of 
renunciation, all of this you wish to renounce? Who will give you the 
strength to do so? No one yet has had the strength!' There is a lake that 
one day refused to let itself flow off and formed a dam where it used to 
flow off: ever since, this lake rises higher and higher. Perhaps this very 
renunciation will lend us the strength to bear renunciation; perhaps 
man will rise ever higher when he no longer flows offinto a god. 
286 
Interruption. - These are hopes; but what will you see and hear of them 
when you have not experienced splendour, ardour, and rosy dawn in 
your own souls? I can only remind - more I cannot do! To move stones, 
to turn animals into humans - is that what you want from me? Oh, if 
you are still stones and animals, you had better look for your Orpheus 7 
first! 
Delight in blindness. - 'My thoughts', said the wanderer to his shadow, 
'should show me where I stand, but they should not betray to me where 
I am going. I love ignorance of the future and do not want to perish of 
impatience and premature tasting of things promised.' 
288 
High spirits. - It seems tome that most people simply do not believe in 
elevated moods, unless it be for moments or fifteen-minute intervals at 
most - except for those few who experience an elevated feeling over a 
longer period. But to be the human being of one elevated feeling, the 
embodiment of a single great mood, has hitherto been a mere dream and 
7 See above, Book II, footnote 3 r, p. 88. 
162 

Book Four: St Januarius 
enchanting possibility; as yet, history does not offer us any certain 
examples of it. Nevertheless history might one day beget such people, 
too, given the creation and determination of a great many preconditions 
that even the dice rolls of the luckiest chance could not put together 
today. Perhaps the usual state for these souls would be what has so far 
entered our souls only as an occasional exception that made us shudder: 
a perpetual movement between high and low and the feeling of high and 
low; a continual sense of ascending stairs and at the same time ofresting 
on clouds. 
Get on the ships I - If one considers how an overall philosophical 
justification of one's way of living and thinking affects each individual -
namely, like a sun, warming, blessing, impregnating, shining especially 
for him; how it makes him independent of praise and blame, self­
sufficient, rich, generous with happiness and good will; how it inces­
santly turns evil into good, brings all forces to bloom and ripen and 
keeps the petty, great weed of melancholy and moroseness from coming 
up at all - one exclaims longingly, in the end: Oh, how I wish that many 
such new suns would yet be created! Even the evil man, the unhappy 
man, and the exceptional man should have their philosophy, their good 
right, their sunshine! Pity for them is not what is needed! We have to 
unlearn this arrogant notion, however long humanity has spent learning 
and practising it - we do not need to present them with confessors, 
conjurers of souls, and forgivers of sins; rather, a new justice is needed! 
And a new motto! And new philosophers! The moral earth, too, is 
round! The moral earth, too, has its antipodes! The antipodes, too, have 
their right to exist! There is another world to <liseover - and more than 
one! On to the ships, you philosophers! 
290 
One thing is needful. - To 'give style' to one's character - a great and rare 
art! It is practised by those who survey all the strengths and weaknesses 
that their nature has to offer and then fit them into an artistic plan until 
each appears as art and reason and even weaknesses delight the eye. 
Here a great mass of second nature has been added; there a piece of first 

The Cay Science 
nature removed - both times through lang practice and daily work at it. 
Here the ugly that could not be removed is concealed; there it is 
reinterpreted into sublimity. Much that is vague and resisted shaping 
has been saved and employed for distant views - it is supposed to 
beckon towards the remote and immense. In the end, when the work is 
complete, it becomes clear how it was the force of a single taste that 
ruled and shaped everything great and small - whether the taste was 
good or bad means less than one may think; it's enough that it was one 
taste! It will be the strong and domineering natures who experience 
their most exquisite pleasure under such coercion, in being bound by 
but also perfected under their own law; the passion of their tremendous 
will becomes less intense in the face of all stylized nature, all conquered 
and serving nature; even when they have palaces to build and gardens to 
design, they resist giving nature free rein. Conversely, it is the weak 
characters with no power over themselves who hate the constraint of 
style: they feel that if this bitterly evil compulsion were to be imposed 
on them, they would have to become commonplace under it - they 
become slaves as soon as they serve; they hate to serve. Such minds -
and they may be of the first rank - are always out to shape or interpret 
their environment as free nature - wild, arbitrary, fantastic, disorderly, 
and surprising - and they are well advised to do so, because only thus do 
they please themselves! For one thing is needful: that a human being 
should attain satisfaction with himself - be it through this or that poetry 
or art; only then is a human being at all tolerable to behold! Whoever is 
dissatisfied with himself is continually prepared to avenge himself for 
this, and we others will be his victims if only by having to endure his 
sight. For the sight of something ugly makes one bad and gloomy. 
Genoa. - I have been looking at this city for a lang time, at its villas and 
pleasure-gardens and the wide circumference of its inhabited heights 
and slopes, and in the end I must say: I see faces that belong to past 
generations; this region is dotted with images of bold and autocratic 
human beings. They have lived and wish to live on - that is what they 
are telling me with their houses, built and adorned to last for centuries 
and not for the fleeting hour: they were well disposed towards life, 
however badly disposed they aften may have been towards themselves. I 

Book Four: St Januarius 
keep seeing the builder, how he rests his gaze on everything built near 
and afar as well as on city, sea, and mountain contours, and how with his 
gaze he is perpetrating acts of violence and conquest: he wants to fit all 
this into his plan and finally make it his possession by incorporating it 
into his plan. The whole region is overgrown with this magnificent, 
insatiable lust for possessions and spoils; and even as these people 
heeded no boundaries in distant lands and, in their thirst for what was 
new, placed a new world beside the old one, so, too, at home each flared 
up against the other and found a way to express his superiority and 
place his personal infinity between himself and his neighbour. Each 
conquered his homeland again for himself by overwhelming it with his 
architectural ideas and refashioning it, so to speak, into a house that was 
a feast for his eyes. In the North one is impressed by the law and by the 
general delight in lawfulness and obedience as one considers the way 
cities are built: this allows one to recognize the inner propensity to 
uniformity and conformism which must have dominated the souls of all 
the builders. But here you find, upon turning every corner, a separate 
human being who knows the sea, adventure, and the Orient; a human 
being averse to the law and to the neighbour as to a kind of boredorn, 
who measures everything old and established with envious eyes: he 
would, with a marvellous cunning of imagination, like to establish all 
this anew at least in thought; to put his hand to it, his meaning into it -
if only for the moment of a sunny afternoon when his insatiable and 
melancholy soul feels sated for once, and only what is his own and 
nothing alien may appear to his eye. 
To the preachers of morals. - I do not want to moralize, but to those who 
do, I give this advice: if you want eventually to deprive the hest things 
and situations of all their worth, then keep talking about them the way 
you have been! Place them at the top of your morality and talk from 
morning till night about the bliss of happiness, the tranquillity of the 
soul, about justice and immanent retribution - the way you carry on, all 
these good things will finally attain a popularity and street-clamour of 
their own, but at the same time all the gold that was on them will have 
worn off through handling, and all the gold inside will have turned to 
lead. Verily, you know the art of alchemy in reverse, the devaluation of 

The Cay Science 
what is most valuable! Sometime you should try a different prescription 
to avoid reaching the opposite of what you seek, as you have so far: deny 
these good things; withdraw from them the mob's acclaim and their 
easy currency; make them once again the bidden modesty of solitary 
souls; say that morality is something forbidden! That way you might win 
over for these things the kind of people who alone matter; I mean the 
heroic. But then there must be something in them that provokes fear and 
not, as hitherto, disgust! Isn't it time to say of morality what Master 
Eckhart said: 'I ask God to rid me of God!' 8 
293 
Our air. - We know it very well: to those who glance at science as if 
passing it on a walk, in the manner of women and unfortunately also 
many artists, the severity of its service - this inexorability in matters 
great and small, this swiftness in weighing, judging, and passing 
judgement - has something dizzying and fear-inspiring. What frightens 
them especially is how the hardest is demanded and the hest done 
despite the absence of praise and awards; rather, as among soldiers, what 
one mostly hears is almost exclusively reproaches and sharp reprimands 
- for doing things well is considered the rule, and failure the exception; 
yet here as everywhere else, the rule has a reticent mouth. Now this 
'severity of science' has something in common with the form and 
decorum of the very hest society: it frightens the uninitiated. But 
someone accustomed to it wants to live nowhere else than in this bright, 
transparent, strongly electric air - in this masculine air. Anywhere else is 
not clean and airy enough for him: he suspects that there, his hest art 
would be of no real use to anyone and of no delight to himself; that 
among misunderstandings half his life would slip through his fingers; 
that much caution, much concealment and restraint would constantly be 
called for - ways of having large amounts of one's strength sapped 
uselessly! But in this severe and clear element he has his full strength: 
here he can fly! Why descend into those murky waters where one has to 
swim and wade and sully one's wings? No, it's too hard for us to live 
there; it's not our fault that we were horn for the air, for clean air, we 
rivals of the light beam, and that we would prefer to ride on specks of 
8 German mystic (1260-1327). This dictum is to be found in his Predigten und Schriften (Frankfurt 
and Hamburg, 1956) p. 195. 
166 

Book Four: St Januarius 
ether, like it - not away from the sun but towards the sun! That, however, 
we cannot do. So let us do all we can do: bring light to the earth; be 'the 
light of the earth'! And for that, we have our wings and our speed and 
our severity; for that, we are masculine and even terrifying, like fire. 
May those be terrified of us who do not know how to gain warmth and 
light from us! 
294 
Against the slanderers of nature. - I find those people unpleasant in whom 
every natural inclination immediately becomes a sickness, something 
disfiguring or even contemptible - they have seduced us into the belief 
that man's natural inclinations are evil; they are the cause of our great 
injustice towards our nature, towards all nature! There are enough 
people who could well entrust themselves to their inclinations with 
grace and without care, but who do not for fear of the imagined 'evil 
essence' of nature! That is why there is so little nobility among human 
beings; its distinguishing feature has always been to have no fear of 
oneself, to expect nothing contemptible from oneself, to fly without 
misgivings wherever we're inclined - we free-born hirds! And wherever 
we arrive, there will always be freedom and sunlight around us. 
295 
Brief habits. - I love brief habits and consider them invaluable means for 
getting to know many things and states down to the bottom of their 
sweetnesses and bitternesses; my nature is designed entirely for brief 
habits, even in the needs of its physical health and generally as far as I 
can see at all, from the lowest to the highest. I always believe this will 
give me lasting satisfaction - even brief habits have this faith of passion, 
this faith in eternity - and that I am to be envied for having found and 
recognized it, and now it nourishes me at noon and in the evening and 
spreads a deep contentment around itself and into me, so that I desire 
nothing else, without having to compare, despise, or hate. And one day 
its time is up; the good thing parts from me, not as something that now 
disgusts me but peacefully and sated with me, as I with it, and as if we 
ought to be grateful to each other and so shake hands to say farewell. 
And already the new waits at the door along with my faith - the 

The Cay Science 
indestructible fool and sage! - that this new thing will be the right thing, 
the last right thing. This happens to me with dishes, thoughts, people, 
cities, poems, music, doctrines, daily schedules, and ways of living. 
Enduring habits, however, I hate, and f eel as if a tyrant has come near me 
and the air around me is thickening when events take a shape that seems 
inevitably to produce enduring habits - for instance, owing to an official 
position, constant relations with the same people, a permanent resi­
dence, or uniquely good health. Yes, at the very bottom of my soul I am 
grateful to all my misery and illnesses and whatever is imperf ect in me 
because they provide a hundred back doors through which I can escape 
enduring habits. To me the most intolerable, the truly terrible, would of 
course be a life entirely without habits, a life that continually demanded 
improvisation - that would be my exile and my Siberia. 
A firm reputation. - A firm reputation used to be a thing of utmost 
utility; and wherever society is still ruled by herd mentality it is still 
today most expedient for everyone to aet as if his character and 
occupation are unchangeable, even if basically they are not. 'One can 
depend on him; he stays the same': wherever society is threatened this is 
the type of praise that means the most. Society sees in this person's 
virtue, in that person's ambition, in the thoughtfulness and passion of a 
third dependable ever-handy instruments. This is a source of great 
gratification to society, and it bestows on this instrument-nature, this 
staying-true-to-oneself, this immutability in views, aspirations, and 
even vices its highest honours. Such esteem, which blooms and has 
bloomed everywhere alongside the morality of custom (Sittlichkeit der 
Sitte), fosters 'character' and brings all change, re-learning, and self­
transformation into ilt repute. However great the advantages of this 
mentality may be elsewhere, to the search for knowledge it is the most 
harmful kind of general judgement, for it condemns and discredits the 
willingness which a seeker after knowledge must have to declare himself 
against his previous opinion and to mistrust anything that wishes to 
become firm in us. The attitude of the seeker after knowledge, which is 
incompatible with a 'firm reputation', is considered dishonourable while 
the petrifaction of opinions has all the honour to itself - still today we 
must live under the spell of such standards! How hard living is when 
168 

Book Four: St Januarius 
one feels the judgement of many millennia against and around oneself! 
It is probable that the search for knowledge was afflicted for many 
millennia with a bad conscience and that there must have been much 
self-contempt and secret misery in the history of the greatest spirits. 
2 97 
Being able to contradict. - Everybody knows now that being able to stand 
contradiction is a high sign of culture. Some even know that the higher 
human being desires and invites contradiction in order to receive a hint 
about his own injustice of which he is as yet unaware. But the ability to 
contradict, the acquired good conscience accompanying hostility 
towards what is familiar, traditional, hallowed - that is better yet than 
both those abilities, and constitutes what is really great, new, and 
amazing in our culture; it is the step of all steps of the liberated spirit: 
who knows that? 
Sigh. - I caught this insight on the wing and quickly took the nearest 
shoddy words to fasten it lest it fly away from me. And now it has <lied 
of these barren words and hangs and flaps in them - and I hardly know 
any more, when I look at it, how I could have felt so happy when I 
caught this hird. 
299 
What one should learn from artists. - What means do we have for making 
things beautiful, attractive, and desirable when they are not? And in 
themselves I think they never are! Here we have something to learn 
from physicians, when for example they dilute something bitter or add 
wine and sugar to the mixing bowl; but even more from artists, who are 
really constantly out to invent new artistic tours de force of this kind. To 
distance oneself from things until there is much in them that one no 
longer sees and much that the eye must add in order to see them at all, or 
to see things around a corner and as if they were cut out and extracted 
from their context, or to place them so that each partially distorts the 
view one has of the others and allows only perspectival glimpses, or to 

The Cay Science 
look at them through coloured glass or in the light of the sunset, or to 
give them a surface and skin that is not fully transparent: all this we 
should learn from artists while otherwise being wiser than they. For 
usually in their case this delicate power stops where art ends and lif e 
begins; we, however, want to be poets of our lives, starting with the 
smallest and most commonplace details. 
300 
Preludes to science - So you believe the sciences would have emerged and 
matured, if they had not been preceded by magicians, alchemists, 
astrologers, and witches who with their promises and false claims 
created a thirst, hunger, and taste for hidden and forbidden powers? 
Indeed, infinitely more has had to be promised than can ever be fulfilled 
in order that anything at all be fulfilled in the realm of knowledge. 
Those things which now appear to us to be preludes and exercises 
preparatory to science were in the past certainly not practised and felt to 
be any such thing. Similarly perhaps to a distant age the whole of 
religion will appear as an exercise and prelude. Perhaps religion could 
have been the strange means of making it possible one day for a few 
individuals to enjoy the whole self-sufficiency of a god and all his power 
of self-redemption. Indeed - one may ask - would man ever have 
learned to feel hunger for himself and to find satisfaction and fullness in 
himself without this religious training and prehistory.2 Did Prometheus 9 
first have to imagine having stolen light and pay for it before he could 
finally discover that he had created light by desiring light, and that not 
only man but also god was the work of his own hands and clay in his 
hands? All mere images of the sculptor - no less than delusion, theft, 
the Caucasus, the vulture, and the whole tragic Prometheia of all those 
whoknow? 
301 
Delusion of the contemplative ones. - Higher human beings distinguish 
themselves from the lower by seeing and hearing, and thoughtfully 
seeing and hearing, immeasurably more - and just this distinguishes 
9 See above, Book 111, footnote 17, p. 125. 

Book Four: St Januarius 
human beings from animals, and the higher animals from the lower. 
The world becomes ever fuller for someone who grows into the height 
of humanity; ever more baited hooks to attract his interest are cast his 
way; the things that stimulate him grow steadily in number, as do the 
kinds of things that please and displease him - the higher human being 
always becomes at the same time happier and unhappier. But a delusion 
remains his constant companion: he thinks himself placed as spectator 
and listener before the great visual and acoustic play that is life; he calls 
his nature contemplative and thereby overlooks the faet that he is also the 
actual poet and ongoing author of life - that, to be sure, he differs 
greatly from the actor of this drama, the so-called man of action, but 
even more so from a mere spectator and festival visitor in front of the 
stage. As the poet, he certainly possesses vis contemplativa10 and a 
retrospective view of his work; but at the same time and above all vis 
creativa, 11 which the man of action lacks, whatever appearances and 
universal belief may say. It is we, the thinking-sensing ones, who really 
and continually make something that is not yet there: the whole 
perpetually growing world of valuations, colours, weights, perspectives, 
scales, affirmations, and negations. This poem that we have invented is 
constantly internalized, drilled, translated into flesh and reality, indeed, 
into the commonplace, by the so-called practical human beings (our 
actors). Whatever has value in the present world has it not in itself, 
according to its nature - nature is always value-less - but has rather 
been given, granted value, and we were the givers and granters! Only we 
have created the world that concerns human beings! But precisely this 
knowledge we lack, and when we catch it for a moment we have 
forgotten it the next: we misjudge our hest power and underestimate 
ourselves just a bit, we contemplative ones. We are neither as proud nor as 
happy as we could be. 
302 
The danger of the happiest. - To have refined senses and a refined taste; 
to be accustomed to the exquisite and most excellent things of the spirit 
as one is to the proper and most usual food; to enjoy a strong, bold, 
audacious soul; to go through life with a calm eye and a firm step, always 
10 'contemplative power' 
11 'creative power' 

The Cay Science 
prepared for the most extreme situations - as for a feast and full of 
yearning for undiscovered worlds and seas, people, and gods; to hearken 
to all cheerful music as if brave men, soldiers, seafarers were perhaps 
seeking a short rest and merriment there - and in the deepest pleasure 
of the moment to be overcome by tears and the whole crimson 
melancholy of the happy: who would not like all of this to be his 
possession, his state! It was the happiness of Romer! The happiness ofthe 
one who invented their gods for the Greeks - I mean, his gods for 
himself! But don't disregard the faet that with this Homeric happiness 
in one's soul one is also more capable of suffering than any other 
creature under the sun! Only at this price can one buy the most precious 
shell hitherto washed ashore by the waves of existence! As its owner, one 
becomes ever more refined in pain and eventually too refined; in the 
end, any slight discontentment and disgust was enough to spoil lif e for 
Homer. He had been unable to solve a silly little riddle posed to him by 
some young fishermen! 12 Yes, the little riddles are the <langer for those 
who are happiest! 
Two happy ones. - Truly, despite his youth, this person knows how to 
improvise lift and amazes even the keenest observer - for he never seems 
to make a mistake even though he constantly plays the riskiest game. It 
reminds one of those masters of musical improvisation to whose bands 
the listener would also like to ascribe a divine infallibility even though, 
like every mortal, they make a mistake here and there. But they are 
practised and inventive and always ready at any moment to incorporate 
into the thematic order the most accidental note to which the stroke of a 
finger or a mood drives them, breathing a beautiful meaning and a soul 
into an accident. Here is an entirely different person: basically every­
thing he wills and plans goes wrong. What occasionally he set his heart 
on several times brought him to the edge of the abyss and within a hair 
of destruction; and if he did escape that, it was certainly not just 'with a 
12 Some of the ancient biographies of Homer state that at the end of his life he was deeply 
chagrined - some even say he died of chagrin - because he was unable to solve a riddle put to 
him by some young fishermen. The riddle: 'What we caught we left behind; what we didn't 
catch we carry with us.' (Answer: lice. Not having any luck with their fishing, they sat down to 
delouse each other. The lice they caught, they discarded; those they missed were still on their 
persons.) See Vita Herodotea, 492-516, Certamen, 321-38, Plutarchi Vita, 62-71 etc. 

Book Four: St Januarius 
black eye.' Do you believe he is unhappy about this? He decided long 
ago not to take his own wishes and plans so seriously. 'If I don't succeed 
at this,' he says to himself, 'I might succeed at that; and on the whole I 
don't know whether I should be more grateful towards my failures than 
towards any success. Was I made to be stubhorn and to have a bull's 
horns? That which constitutes the value and outcome of life for me lies 
elsewhere; my pride as well as my misery lie elsewhere. I know more 
about life because I have so aften been on the verge of losing it; and 
precisely therefore do I get more out of life than any of you!' 
By doing we forgo. - Basically I abhor every morality that says: 'Do not 
do this! Renounce! Overcome yourselfl' But I am well disposed towards 
those moralities that impel me to do something again and again from 
morning till evening, and to dream of it at night, and to think of nothing 
else than doing this well, as well as I alone can! When one lives that way, 
one thing after another that does not belong to such a life drops off: 
without hate or reluctance one sees this take its leave today and that 
tomorrow, like the yellow leaves that every faint wisp of wind carries off 
a tree. Or he does not notice that it takes its leave - so sternly is his eye 
set on its goal, entirely forwards, not sideways, backwards, downwards. 
'What we do should determine what we forgo; in doing we forgo' -
that's how I like it; that is my placitum. 13 But I do not want to strive for 
my impoverishment with open eyes; I do not like negative virtues -
virtues whose very essence is negation and self-denial. 
Self-control. _- Those moralists who command man first and above all to 
gain control of himself thereby afflict him with a peculiar disease, 
namely, a constant irritability at all natural stirrings and inclinations and 
as it were a kind of itch. Whatever may henceforth push, pull, beckon, 
impel him from within or without will always strike this irritable one as 
endangering his self-control: no longer may he entrust himself to any 
instinct or free wing-beat; instead he stands there rigidly with a 
13 'opinion' 
173 

The Cay Science 
defensive posture, armed against himself, with sharp and susp1c1ous 
eyes, the eternal guardian of his fortress, since he has turned himself 
into a fortress. Indeed, he can become great this way! But how insuffer­
able he has become to others; how impoverished and cut off from the 
most beautiful fortuities of the soul! And indeed from all further 
instruction! For one must be able at times to lose oneself if one wants to 
learn something from things that we ourselves are not. 
Stoics and Epicureans. - The Epicurean seeks out the situation, the 
persons, and even the events that suit his extremely sensitive intellectual 
constitution; he forgoes the rest - that is, almost everything - because it 
would be too strong and heavy a diet. The Stoic, by contrast, trains 
himself to swallow stones and worms, glass shards and scorpions 
without nausea; he wants his stomach to be ultimately insensible to 
everything the chance of existence pours into him - he brings to mind 
the Arabian sect of the Assua that one encounters in Algiers:14 like these 
insensitive people, he likes to aet out his insensitivity before an invited 
audience, which is precisely what the Epicurean gladly eschews - for he 
has his 'garden'! 15 Stoicism may well be advisable forthose with whom 
fate improvises and who live in violent times and depend on impulsive 
and changeable people. But someone who more or less expects fate to 
allow him to spin a long thread does well to take an Epicurean 
orientation; people engaged in work of the spirit have always done so! 
For it would be the loss of all losses, for them, to forfeit their subtle 
sensitivity in exchange for a hard Stoic skin with porcupine spines. 
In favour of criticism. - Something you formerly loved as a truth or a 
probability now strikes you as an error; you cast it off and believe your 
reason has made a victory. But maybe that error was as necessary for you 
then, when you were still another person - you are always another 
14 For further information about this sect see P. J. Andre, Contribution d /'etude des confreries 
musulmanes (Algiers, 1956), pp. 216ff. 
15 Epicurus (see above, Book 1, footnote 34, p. 59, and Book IV, footnote 4, p. 157), when he was 
about thirty-five, bought a house in Athens with a garden, setting up there a school of 
philosophy which came to be known as 'The Garden'. 
174 

Book Four: St Januarius 
person - as are all your present 'truths', like a skin that concealed and 
covered many things you weren't allowed to see yet. It is your new life, 
not your reason, that has killed that opinion for you: you don 't need it 
any more, and now it collapses and unreason crawls out of it into the 
light like a worm. When we criticize, we are not doing something 
arbitrary and impersonal; it is, at least very often, proof that there are 
living, active forces within us shedding skin. We negate and have to 
negate because something in us wants to live and affirm itself, something 
we might not yet know or see! - This in favour of criticism. 
308 
The history of every day. - What is the history of your every day? 
Consider the habits of which it consists: are they the produet of 
innumerable little cowardices and lazinesses or of your courage and 
innovative reason? Different as the two cases may be, people could 
conceivably give you equal praise and you might actually benefit them 
equally either way. However, praise and benefit and respectability may 
be enough for those who want merely a good conscience - but not for 
you who scrupulously examine the inside of things and know about 
conscience! 
From the seventh solitude. - One day the wanderer slammed a door shut 
behind him, came to a halt, and wept. Then he said: 'This penchant and 
passion for what is true, real, non-apparent, certain - how it exasperates 
me! Why does this gloomy and earnest oppressor follow me of all 
people! I want to rest, but he won't allow it. How many things seduce 
me to linger? Everywhere there are Armida's gardens 16 for me. Thus 
ever again I must tear myself away and feel another new bitterness in 
my heart! Once again I must lift my foot, this tired, wounded foot; and 
having to do so often makes me cast a wrathful glance back at the most 
beautiful thing that could not hold me - because it could not hold me!' 
16 In the epic poem Gerusalemme Liberata (1575) by Torquato Tasso (1544-95), the enchantress 
Armida has a magic garden into which she entices men. 
175 

The Cay Science 
310 
Will and wave. - How greedily this wave is approaching, as if it were 
trying to reach something! How it crawls with terrifying haste into the 
inmost crevices of the craggy gorge! It seems to be trying to arrive 
before someone else; something of value, of great value, seems to be 
hidden there. - And now it is returning, a bit more slowly but still 
quite white with excitement - is it disappointed? Has it found what it 
was seeking? Is it simulating disappointment? - But already another 
wave is nearing, still more greedily and wildly than the first; and its 
soul, too, seems full of secrets and the hunger for treasure-digging. 
That is how the waves live - that is how we live, we who will - I will 
say no more. So? You <listrust me? You are angry with me, you 
beautiful monsters? Are you afraid I will divulge your entire secret? 
Well, be angry with me; raise your dangerous green bodies as high as 
you can; make a wall between me and the sun - as you are now! 
Truly, at this moment nothing remains of the world but green dusk 
and green thunderbolts. Carry on as you want, you high-spirited ones: 
roar with delight and malice - or <live again, pour your emeralds into 
the deepest depths, cast your endless white mane of foam and froth 
over them: everything is fine with me because everything suits you so 
well, and I love you so for everything - how could I betray you! For -
mark my words! - I know you and your secret; I know your kind! 
After all, you and I are of one kind! After all, you and I have one 
secret! 
31 I 
Refracted light. - One is not always brave; and when one gets tired, 
one of us, too, is likely one day to lament: 'It is so hard to hurt people 
- why is it necessary! What good does it do us to live in seclusion 
when we don't want to keep to ourselves what gives offence? Wouldn't 
it be more advisable to live in the bustle and to do good to individuals 
as compensation for the sins that should and must be committed 
against everyone? To be foolish with fools, vain with the vain, fanatic 
with the fanatic? Wouldn't it be fair, given the extravagant degree of 
deviation on the whole? When I hear of other people's malice towards 
me, is not satisfaction the first thing I f eel? Q!.iite right! (I seem to be 

Book Four: St Januarius 
saying to them) I am so little in agreement with you and have so 
much truth on my side that you might as well have a good day at my 
expense whenever you can! Here are my faults and mistakes; here is 
my delusion, my bad taste, my confusion, my tears, my vanity, my 
owlish seclusion, my contradictions! Here's something for you to 
laugh at! So then laugh and be merry! I am not angry with the law 
and nature of things that want faults and mistakes to cause merriment! 
To be sure, there have been "more beautiful" times when one could 
still, with every moderately new idea, feel so indispensable as to take it 
out on the street and shout at everyone: "Behold! The kingdom of 
heaven is at hand!" 17 I would not miss myself if I were gone. We are 
all dispensable!' But as I said, this is not how we think when we are 
brave; then we don't think about that. 
312 
My dog. - I have named my pain and call it 'dog' - it's just as faithful, 
just as obtrusive and shameless, just as entertaining, just as elever as 
every other dog - and I can scold it and take my bad moods out on it the 
way others do with their dogs, servants, and wives. 
No image of torment. - I want to follow Raphael's example and never 
paint another image of torment. There are enough sublime things; one 
does not have to seek sublimity where it lives in sisterhood with cruelty; 
anyway, my ambition would find no satisfaction if I wanted to make 
myself a sublime torturer. 
New domestic animals. - I want my lion and eagle around so that I can 
always have hints and forebodings to know how great or small my 
strength is. Must I look down on them today and fear them? And will 
the hour return when they look up at me - in fear? 
17 Matthew 4:17 
177 

The Cay Science 
31 5 
On the last hour. - Storms are my <langer: will I have my storm of 
which I perish, as Cromwell perished of his storm? Or will I go out 
like a light that no wind blows out, but that grew tired and sated with 
itself - a burned-out light? Or finally: will I blow myself out lest I 
bum out? -
316 
Prophetic human beings. - You are not sensible to the faet that 
prophetic human beings are full of suffering; you simply think they 
have been granted a beautiful 'gift' that you yourselves probably 
would like to have - but I will express myself in a parable. How 
animals can suffer from electricity in the air and clouds! We see how 
certain species, for example, monkeys, have a prophetic insight about 
the weather (as one can observe even in Europe - and not only in 
zoos, but also on Gibraltar). But we don't think of the faet that for 
them, their pains are prophets for them! When under the influence of 
an approaching, as yet far from visible cloud a strong positive 
electrical charge suddenly turns into negative electricity and a change 
in the weather is impending, these animals aet as if an enemy were 
approaching and prepare for defence or escape. Most often they crawl 
into hiding - they don't see bad weather as weather, but as an enemy 
whose hand they can already feel! 
317 
Retrospection. - While we are living each phase of our lives we 
rarely recognize its true pathos, but always see it as the only state 
that is now possible for us and reasonable and - to use some words 
and a distinction of the Greeks - thoroughly an ethos and not a 
pathos. 18 Today a few notes of music called back to my memory a 
winter and a house and a most solitary life, as well as the feeling I 
lived with: I thought I could continue to live that way forever. But 
now I understand that it was pathos and passion throughout, 
18 A lasting state of character, nota temporary state ofbeing affected one way or another 

Book Four: St Januarius 
comparable to this painful, courageous music which brings certain 
solace - one is not allowed to possess such things for years at a 
time, how much the less for eternities: they would make one too 
'overworldly' for this planet. 
Wisdom in pain. - There is as much wisdom in pain as in pleasure: like 
pleasure, pain is one of the prime species-preserving forces. If it 
weren't, it would have perished long ago: that it hurts is no argument 
against it - it is its essence. In pain I hear the captain's command: 'Pull 
in the sails!' The hardy seafarer 'Man' must have learned to adjust the 
sails in a thousand ways; otherwise he would have gone under too 
quickly and the ocean would have swallowed him too soon. We have to 
know how to live with reduced energy, too: as soon as pain sounds its 
safety signal, it is time for such a reduction - some great <langer, some 
storm is approaching, and we do well to 'inflate ourselves' as little as 
possible. True, there are people who hear exactly the opposite command 
when great pain approaches and who never look as proud, bellicose, and 
happy as when a storm is nearing - yes, pain itself gives them their 
greatest moments! They are the heroic human beings, the great pain­
bringers of humanity, those few or rare ones who need the same apology 
as pain itself - and truly, they should not be denied this! They are 
eminently species-preserving and species-enhancing forces, if only 
because they resist comfort and do not hide their nausea at this type of 
happiness. 
319 
As interpreters of our experiences. - One type of honesty has been alien 
to all religion-founders and such: they have not made their experi­
ences a matter of conscience for their knowledge. 'What did I really 
experience? What was going on inside and around me? Was my reason 
bright enough? Was my will turned against all deceptions of the 
senses and stalwart in warding off the fantastic?' None of them has 
asked such questions. Even today, none of our dear religious ones asks 
them; rather, they have a thirst for things that are contrary to reason 
and do not want to make it too hard for themselves to quench it - so 
179 

The Cay Science 
they experience 'miracles' and 'rebirths' and hear the voices of the 
angels! But we, we others, we reason-thirsty ones, want to face our 
experiences as sternly as we would a scientific experiment, hour by 
hour, day by day! We want to be our own experiments and guinea­
p1gs. 
320 
On meeting again. - A.: Do I still understand you rightly? You are 
searching? Where is your corner and star within the real world? Where 
can you lie down in the sun so that an abundance of well-being comes to 
you, too, and your existence justifies itself? Let everyone do that for 
himself - you seem to me to be saying - and let everyone put out of his 
mind generalities and worries about others and about society! B: I want 
more than that; I am no seeker. I want to create for myself a sun of my 
own. 
321 
New caution. - Let's stop thinking so much about punishing, 
reproaching, and improving! We rarely change an individual; and 
should we succeed, something else may have been accomplished, 
unnoticed: we may have been changed through himl Let's rather 
make sure our own influence on all that is to come balances and 
outweighs his influence! Let's not struggle in a direct fight, which is 
what reproaching, punishing, and desiring to improve amount to. 
Let's rather raise ourselves that much higher. Let us give our own 
example ever more brilliant colours! Let us darken the others 
through our light! No - let's not become darker on their account, 
like those who punish and are dissatisfied! Let's sooner step aside! 
Let us look away! 
322 
Parable. - Those thinkers in whom all stars move in cyclical orbits are 
not the deepest; he who looks into himself as into a vast space and bears 
galaxies within also knows how irregular galaxies are; they lead into the 
chaos and labyrinth of existence. 
180 

Book Four: St Januarius 
32 3 
Luck in fate - Fate bestows on us the greatest distinction when it has let 
us fight fora time on our opponents' side. Thus we are predestined fora 
great victory. 
324 
In media vita. 19 - No, life has not disappointed me. Rather, I find it 
truer, more desirable and mysterious every year - ever since the day the 
great liberator overcame me: the thought that life could be an experi­
ment for the knowledge-seeker - not a duty, not a disaster, not a 
deception! And knowledge itself: let it be something else to others, like a 
bed to rest on or the way to one, or a diversion or a form of idleness; to 
me it is a world of dangers and victories in which heroic feelings also 
have their dance- and playgrounds. 'Lift as a means to knowledge' - with 
this principle in one's heart one can not only live bravely but also live 
gaily and laugh gaily! And who would know how to laugh and live well 
who did not first have a good understanding of war and victory? 
What belongs to greatness - Who will attain something great if he does 
not f eel in himself the power to inflict great pain? Being able to suff er is 
the least; weak women and even slaves often achieve mastery at that. But 
not to perish of inner distress and uncertainty when one inflicts great 
suffering and hears the cry of this suffering - that is great; that belongs 
to greatness. 
Soul-doctors and pain. - All preachers of morals, and all theologians, share 
one bad habit: they all try to talk people into thinking they are in a very 
bad way and need some severe, final, radical cure. And since humanity 
has for centuries far too eagerly lent its ear to these doctrines, something 
of this superstition of being very badly off has finally stuck, so that they 
19 'in mid-life' 

The Cay Science 
are now only tao ready to sigh and find nothing good in life and make 
sad faces together, as if life were really quite hard to endure. In reality, 
they are uninhibitedly sure of and in love with their lives, and are full 
of innumerable wiles and tricks to get rid of unpleasantness and 
extract the thorn of pain and misfortune. Talk of pain and misfortune 
always strikes me as exaggerated, as if it were a matter of good 
manners to exaggerate here while deliberately keeping quiet about the 
faet that there are innumerable palliatives against pain, such as an 
aesthetics, or the feverish haste of thoughts, or a restful position of the 
body, or good and bad memories, intentions, hopes, and many types of 
pride and sympathy, which have nearly the same effect as anaesthesia 
- and at the highest degrees of pain, unconsciousness automatically 
takes over. We know quite well how to trickle sweets onto our 
bitternesses, especially onto the soul's bitternesses; we find aid in our 
boldness and sublimity, as well as in the nobler deliriums of submis­
sion and resignation. A loss is a loss for barely an hour; somehow it 
also brings us a gift from heaven - new strength, for example, or at 
least a new opportunity for strength! What fantasies about the inner 
'miseries' of evil persons the preachers of morals have concocted! How 
they have even lied to us about the unhappiness of passionate people! 
Yes, 'lied' is here the proper term: they knew very well about the 
superabundant happiness of this type of person, but kept a deathly 
silence about it, since it constituted a refutation of their theory on 
which happiness arises only with the annihilation of passion and the 
silencing of the will! Finally, concerning these soul-doctors' prescrip­
tion and their praise for a severe, radical cure, ane may ask: is our life 
really so painful and burdensome that it would be advantageous for us 
to trade it for a fossilized Stoic way of life? Things are not bad enough 
for us that they have to be bad for us in the Stoic style! 
Taking seriously. - For most people, the intellect is an awkward, gloomy, 
creaking machine that is hard to start: when they want to work with this 
machine and think well, they call it 'taking the matter seriously' - oh, 
how taxing good thinking must be for them! The lovely human beast 
seems to lose its good mood when it thinks well; it becomes 'serious'! 
And 'where laughter and gaiety are found, thinking is good for nothing' 
182 

Book Four: St Januarius 
- that is the prejudice of this serious beast against all 'gay science'. Well 
then, let us prove it a prejudice! 
To harm stupidity. - Surely the creed concerning the reprehensibility 
of egoism, preached so stubbornly and with so much conviction, has 
on the whole harmed egoism (to the advantage of, as I will repeat a 
hundred times, the herd instincts!) - above all, by depriving egoism of 
its good conscience and telling us to seek in it the true source of all 
unhappiness. 'Your selfishness is the reason your life is miserable 
( Unheil)' - that was preached for millennia and, as I said, harmed 
selfishness and deprived it of much spirit, much cheerfulness, much 
inventiveness, much beauty; it made selfishness stupid and ugly and 
poisoned it! Ancient philosophy, by contrast, taught a quite different 
main source of misery ( Unheil): from Socrates onwards these thinkers 
never tired of preaching, 'Your thoughtlessness and stupidity, your 
way of living according to the rule, your subordination to the opinion 
of your neighbour is the reason why you so seldom achieve happiness 
- wc thinkers are, as thinkers, the happiest.' Let us not decide here 
whether this sermon against stupidity had better reasons on its side 
than the sermon against selfishness; what is certain, however, is that it 
deprived stupidity of its good conscience - these philosophers harmed 
stupidity. 
Leisure and idleness. - There is something of the American lndian, 
something of the savagery peculiar to the Indian blood, in the way the 
Americans strive for gold; and their breathless haste in working - the 
true vice of the new world - is already starting to spread to old Europe, 
making it savage and covering it with a most odd mindlessness. Already 
one is ashamed of keeping still; long reflection almost gives people a bad 
conscience. One thinks with a watch in hand, as one eats lunch with an 
eye on the financial pages - one lives like someone who might always 
'miss out on something'. 'Rather do anything than nothing' - even this 
principle is a cord to strangle all culture and all higher taste. Just as all 
forms are visibly being destroyed by the haste of the workers, so, too, is 

The Cay Science 
the feeling for form itself, the ear and eye for the melody of movements. 
The proof of this lies in the crude obviousness which is universally 
demanded in all situations in which people want for once to be honest 
with others - in their relations with friends, women, relatives, children, 
teachers, students, leaders, and princes: one no longer has time and 
energy for ceremony, for civility with detours, for esprit in conversation, 
and in general for any otium 2° For life in a hunt for profit constantly 
forces people to expend their spirit to the point of exhaustion in 
continual pretence or out-smarting or forestalling others: the true virtue 
today is doing something in less time than someone else. And thus 
hours in which honesty is allowed are rare; during them, however, one is 
tired and wants not only to 'let oneself go' but also to lay oneself down 
and stretch oneself out unceremoniously to one's full length and breadth. 
This is the way people now write !etters, the style and spirit of which 
will always be the true 'sign of the times'. If sociability and the arts still 
offer any delight, it is the kind of delight that overworked slaves make 
for themselves. How frugal our educated and uneducated have become 
concerning 'joy'! How they are becoming increasingly suspicious of all 
joy! More and more, work gets all good conscience on its side; the desire 
for joy already calls itself a 'need to recuperate' and is starting to be 
ashamed of itself. 'One owes it to one's health' - that is what one says 
when caught on an excursion in the countryside. Soon we may well 
reach the point where one can't give in to the desire for a vita 
contemplativa21 (that is, taking a walk with ideas and friends) without 
self-contempt and a bad conscience. Well, formerly it was the other way 
around: work was afflicted with a bad conscience. A person of good 
family concealed the faet that he worked if need compelled him to work. 
The slave worked under the pressure of the feeling that he was doing 
something contemptible: 'doing' was itself contemptible. 'Nobility and 
honour are attached solely to otium and bellum'22 - that was the ancient 
prejudice! 
330 
Applause. -A thinker needs no applause and clapping of hands provided 
he is sure of his own clapping of hands; he cannot do without that. Are 
20 'leisure' 21 'the contemplative life' 22 'war' 

Book Four: St Januarius 
there people who can dispense with that, too, and altogether with every 
kind of applause? I doubt it; and Tacitus, who did not slander the wise, 
said even of the wisest of men: quando etiam sapientibus gloriae cupido 
novissima excuitut23 - which for him means never. 
331 
Better deaf than deafened - Formerly one wanted to be talked about; that 
is no longer enough, since the market has grown too large - only a shout 
will do. As a result, even good voices shout themselves down, and the 
best goods are offered by hoarse voices; without the vendors' cry and 
hoarseness there is no longer any genius. That is, to be sure, a bad epoch 
for a thinker; he must learn how to find his own quietude even between 
two noises, and pretend he is deaf until he really is. As long as he has 
not learned this, he runs the risk of going to pieces from impatience and 
headaches. 
332 
The evil hour. - Every philosopher has probably had an evil hour when 
he thought: What do I matter if people don't accept my bad arguments, 
too? And then some malicious little hird flew over him and chirped: 
'What do you matter? What do you matter?' 
333 
What knowing means. - Non ridere, non lugere, neque detestari, sed 
intelligere!24 says Spinoza as simply and sublimely as is his wont. Yet in 
the final analysis, what is this intelligere other than the way we become 
sensible of the other three? A result of the different and conflicting 
impulses to laugh, lament, and curse? Before knowledge is possible, 
each of these impulses must first have presented its one-sided view of 
the thing or event; then comes the fight between these one-sided views, 
and occasionally out of it a mean, an appeasement, a concession to all 
23 'since the desire for farne is the last thing even the wise are able to rid themselves of'; Tacitus 
(first century AD) Histories IV .6 
24 'not to laugh at or lament over or despise, but to understand'; Spinoza (see above, Book 1, 
footnote 28, p. 55) Ethica, Book III, Praefatio 

The Cay Science 
three sides, a kind of justice and contract; for in virtue of justice and a 
contract all these impulses can assert and maintain themselves in 
existence and each can finally feel it is in the right vis-a-vis all the 
others. Since only the ultimate reconciliation scenes and final accounts 
of this long process rise to consciousness, we suppose that intelligere 
must be something conciliatory, just, and good, something essentially 
opposed to the instincts, when in faet it is only a certain behaviour of the 
drives towards one another. For the longest time, conscious thought was 
considered thought itself; only now does the truth dawn on us that by 
far the greatest part of our mind's activity proceeds unconscious and 
unfelt; but I think these drives which here fight each other know very 
well how to make themselves felt by and how to hurt each other. This 
may well be the source of that great and sudden exhaustion that afflicts 
all thinkers (it is the exhaustion of the battlefield). Indeed, there may be 
many hidden instances for heroism in our warring depths, but certainly 
nothing divine, eternally resting in itself, as Spinoza supposed. Conscious 
thought, especially that of the philosopher, is the least vigorous and 
therefore also the relatively mildest and calmest type of thought; and 
thus precisely philosophers are most easily led astray about the nature 
of knowledge. 
334 
One must learn to love. - This happens to us in music: first one must 
learn to hear a figure and melody at all, to detect and distinguish it, to 
isolate and delimit it as a life in itself; then one needs effort and good 
will to stand it despite its strangeness; patience with its appearance 
and expression, and kindheartedness about its oddity. Finally comes a 
moment when we are used to it; when we expect it; when we sense 
that we'd miss it if it were missing; and now it continues relentlessly 
to compel and enchant us until we have become its humble and 
enraptured lovers, who no longer want anything better from the world 
than it and it again. But this happens to us not only in music: it is in 
just this way that we have learned to love everything we now love. We 
are always rewarded in the end for our good will, our patience, our 
fair-mindedness and gentleness with what is strange, as it gradually 
casts off its veil and presents itself as a new and indescribable beauty. 
That is its thanks for our hospitality. Even he who loves himself will 
186 

Book Four: St Januarius 
have learned it this way - there is no other way. Love, too, must be 
learned. 
335 
Long live physics I - So, how many people know how to observe? And of 
these few, how many to observe themselves? 'Everyone is farthest from 
himself' 25 - every person who is expert at scrutinizing the inner life of 
others knows this to his own chagrin; and the saying, 'Know thyself', 
addressed to human beings by a god, is near to malicious. 26 That self­
observation is in such a bad state, however, is most clearly confirmed by 
the way in which nearly everyone speaks of the nature of a moral aet -
that quick, willing, convinced, talkative manner, with its look, its smile, 
its obliging eagerness! People seem to be wanting to say to you, 'But my 
dear fellow, that is precisely my subject! You are directing your question 
to the person who is competent to answer it: there is, as it happens, 
nothing I am wiser about. So: when man judges "that is right" and 
infers "hence it must come about!" and then does what he thus has 
recognized to be right and described as necessary - then the nature of 
his aet is moral!' But, my friend, you are speaking of three acts instead 
of one: even the judgement 'that is right', for example, is an aet. 
Wouldn't it be possible for a person to make a judgement in a way that 
would be moral or immoral? Why do you take this and specifically this 
to be right? 'Because my conscience tells me so; conscience never speaks 
immorally, since it determines what is to count as moral!' But why do 
you listen to the words of your conscience? And what gives you the right 
to consider such a judgement true and infallible? For this belief - is 
there no conscience? Do you know nothing of an intellectual conscience? 
A conscience behind your 'conscience'? Your judgement, 'that is right' 
has a prehistory in your drives, inclinations, aversions, experiences, and 
what you have failed to experience; you have to ask, 'how did it emerge 
there?' and then also, 'what is really impelling me to listen to it?' You 
can listen to its commands like a good soldier who heeds the command 
of his officer. Or like a woman who loves the one who commands. Or 
like a flatterer and coward who f ears the commander. Or like a fool who 
25 Reversal of common German expression 'Everyone is closest to himself'; cf. Andria IV .i.12 by 
the Roman comedy-writer Terence (second century B c ). 
26 Motto inscribed over the entrance to the oracle of Apollo at Delphi 

The Cay Science 
obeys because he can think of no objection. In short, there are a 
hundred ways to listen to your conscience. But that you hear this or that 
judgement as the words of conscience, i.e. that you feel something to be 
right may have its cause in your never having thought much about 
yourself and in your blindly having accepted what has been labelled 
right since your childhood; or in the faet that fulfilling your duties has so 
far brought you bread and honours - and you consider it right because 
it appears to you as your own 'condition of existence' (and that you have 
a right to existence seems irrefutable to you). For all that, thefirmness of 
your moral judgement could be evidence of your personal wretchedness, 
of lack of a personality; your 'moral strength' might have its source in 
your stubbornness - or in your inability to envisage new ideals. And, 
briefly, had you reflected more subtly, observed better, and studied 
more, you would never continue to call this 'duty' of yours and this 
'conscience' of yours duty and conscience. Your insight into how such 
things as moral judgements could ever have come into existence would spoil 
these emotional words for you, as other emotional words, for example, 
'sin', 'salvation of the soul', and 'redemption' have been spoiled for you. 
And now don't bring up the categorical imperative, my friend! The 
term tickles my ear and makes me laugh despite your very serious 
presence. I am reminded ofold Kant, who helped himself to (erschlichen) 
the 'thing in itself' - another very ridiculous thing! - and was punished 
for this when the 'categorical imperative' crept into (beschlichen) his 
heart and made him stray back to 'God', 'soul', 'freedom', 'immortality', 
like a fox who strays back into his cage. Yet it had been his strength and 
cleverness that had broken open the cage!27 What? You admire the 
categorical imperative within you? This 'firmness' of your so-called 
moral judgement? This absoluteness of the feeling, 'here everyone must 
judge as I do'? Rather admire your selfishness here! And the blindness, 
pettiness, and simplicity of your selfishness! For it is selfish to consider 
one's own judgement a universal law, and this selfishness is blind, pctty, 
27 In the Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Kant argued that the great concepts of traditional 
speculation - God, the soul, freedom - did not designate objects about which it was even in 
principle possible for us to know anything. This seemed to spell the end of traditional 
metaphysics and theology. In the Critique of Practical Reason (1788), however, Kant seemed to 
argue that the morality required us to accept as 'postulates of pure practical reason' a number of 
principles such as the existence of God and the continuation of some form of life after death. 
This was thought by many to reintroduce the possibility of a version of the theology it had been 
the great glory of his earlier work to terminate. 'The categorical imperative' is Kant's 
fundamental principle of morality. 
188 

Book Four: St Januarius 
and simple because it shows that you haven't yet discovered yourself or 
created for yourself an ideal of your very own - for this could never be 
someone else's, let alone everyone's, everyone's! No one who judges, 'in 
this case everyone would have to aet like this' has yet taken five steps 
towards self-knowledge. For he would then know that there neither are 
nor can be actions that are all the same; that every aet ever performed 
was done in an altogether unique and unrepeatable way, and that this 
will be equally true of every future aet; that all prescriptions of action 
(even the most inward and subtle rules of all moralities so far) relate 
only to their rough exterior; that these prescriptions may yield an 
appearance of sameness, but only just an appearance; that as one observes 
or recollects any action, it is and remains impenetrable; that our 
opinions about 'good' and 'noble' and 'great' can never be proven true by 
our actions because every aet is unknowable; that our opinions, valua­
tions, and tables of what is good are certainly some of the most powerful 
levers in the machinery of our actions, but that in each case, the law of 
its mechanism is unprovable. Let us therefore limit ourselves to the 
purification of our opinions and value judgements and to the creation of 
tab/es of what is good that are new and all our own: let us stop brooding 
over the 'moral value of our actions'! Yes, my friends, it is time to feel 
nauseous about some people's moral chatter about others. Sitting in 
moral judgement should offend our taste. Let us leave such chatter and 
such bad taste to those who have nothing to do but drag the past a f ew 
steps further through time and who never live in the present - that is, to 
the many, the great majority! We, however, want to become who we are -
human beings who are new, unique, incomparable, who give themselves 
laws, who create themselves! To that end we must become the hest 
students and discoverers of everything lawful and necessary in the 
world: we must become physicists in order to be creators in this sense -
while hitherto all valuations and ideals have been built on ignorance of 
physics or in contradiction to it. So, long live physics! And even more 
long live what compels us to it - our honesty! 
Nature's stinginess. - Why has nature been so miserly towards humans 
that it did not allow them to shine - one more brightly, the other less so, 
each according to his inner magnitude of light? Why are great human 

The Cay Science 
beings not as beautifully visible in their own rising and setting as the 
sun? How much more unambiguous this would make life among men! 
337 
The 'humanity' of the future. - When I view this age with the eyes of a 
distant age, I can find nothing odder in present-day man than his 
peculiar virtue and disease called 'the sense for history'. This is the 
beginning of something completely new and strange in history: if one 
gave this seed a few centuries and more, it might ultimately become a 
wonderful growth with an equally wonderful smell that could make our 
old earth more agreeable to inhabit. We present-day humans are just 
beginning to form the chain of a very powerful future feeling, link by 
link - we hardly know what we are doing. It seems to us almost as if we 
are dealing not with a new feeling but with a decrease in all old feelings: 
the sense for history is still something so poor and cold, and many are 
struck by it as by a frost and made even poorer and colder by it. To 
others it appears as the sign of old age creeping up, and they see our 
planet as a melancholy sick man who chronicles his youth in order to 
forget his present condition. Indeed, that is one colour of this new 
feeling: he who is able to feel the history of man altogether as his own 
his tory f eels in a monstrous generalization all the grief of the invalid 
thinking of health, of the old man thinking of the dreams of his youth, 
of the lover robbed of his beloved, of the martyr whose ideal is 
perishing, of the hero on the eve after a battle that decided nothing but 
brought him wounds and the loss of a friend. But to bear and to be able 
to bear this monstrous sum of all kinds of grief and still be the hero 
who, on the second day of battle, greets dawn and his fortune as a 
person whose horizon stretches millennia before and behind him, as the 
dutiful heir to all the nobility of past spirit, as the most aristocratic of 
old nobles and at the same time the first of a new nobility the likes of 
which no age has ever seen or dreamt: to take this upon one's soul - the 
oldest, the newest, losses, hopes, conquests, victories of humanity. To 
finally take all this in one soul and compress it into one feeling - this 
would surely have to produce a happiness unknown to humanity so far: 
a divine happiness full of power and love, full of tears and laughter, a 
happiness which, like the sun in the evening, continually draws on its 
inexhaustible riches, giving them away and pouring them into the sea, a 
190 

Book Four: St Januarius 
happiness which, like the evening sun, feels richest when even the 
poorest fisherman is rowing with a golden oar! This divine feeling 
would then be called - humanity! 
The will to suffer and those who feel compassion. - Is it good for you 
yourselves to be above all else compassionate persons? And is it good for 
those who suffer if you are compassionate? But let us leave the first 
question unanswered for a moment. What we most deeply and most 
personally suffer from is incomprehensible and inaccessible to nearly 
everyone else; here we are hidden from our nearest, even if we eat from 
the same pot. But whenever we are noticed to be suffering, our suffering 
is superficially construed; it is the essence of the feeling of compassion 
that it strips the suffering of what is truly personal: our 'benefactors' 
diminish our worth and our will more than our enemies do. In most 
cases ofbeneficence toward those in distress there is something offensive 
in the intellectual frivolity with which the one who feels compassion 
plays the role of fate: he knows nothing of the whole inner sequence and 
interconnection that spells misfortune for me or for you! The entire 
economy of my soul and the balance effected by 'misfortune', the 
breaking open of new springs and needs, the healing of old wounds, the 
shedding of entire periods of the past - all such things that can be 
involved in misfortune do not concern the dear compassionate one: they 
want to help and have no thought that there is a personal necessity of 
misfortune; that terrors, deprivations, impoverishments, midnights, 
adventures, risks, and blunders are as necessary for me and you as their 
opposites; indeed, to express myself mystically, that the path to one's 
own heaven always leads through the voluptuousness of one's own hell. 
No, they know nothing of that: the 'religion of compassion' (or 'the 
heart') commands them to help, and they believe they have helped hest 
when they have helped most quickly! Should you adherents to this 
religion really have the same attitude towards yourselves that you have 
towards your f ellow men; should you refuse to let your suffering lie on 
you even for an hour and instead constantly prevent all possible 
misfortune ahead of time; should you experience suff ering and displea­
sure as evil, hateful, deserving of annihilation, as a def ect of existence, 
then you have besides your religion of pity also another religion in your 

The Cay Science 
hearts; and the latter is perhaps the mother of the former - the religion 
ofsnug cosiness. Oh, how little do you know ofthe happiness of man, you 
comfortable and good-natured ones! For happiness and misfortune 
(Gluck und Ungluck) are two siblings and twins who either grow up 
together or - as with you - remain smal! together! But now back to the 
first question. How is it possible to keep to one 's own path! Some 
clamour is constantly calling us aside; rarely does our eye see something 
there that does not make it necessary to drop our own occupation 
instantly and spring to assistance. I know, there are a hundred decent 
and praiseworthy ways oflosing myselffrom my path, and, verily, highly 
'moral' ways! Yes, the moral teacher of compassion even goes so far as to 
hold that precisely this and only this is moral - to lose one 's own way 
like this in order to help a neighbour. I, too, know with certainty that 
I need only to expose myself to the sight of real distress and I, too, am 
lost! If a suff ering friend said to me, 'Look, I am about to die; please 
promise to die with me', I would promise it; likewise, the sight of a 
small mountain tribe fighting for its freedom would make me offer my 
hand and my life - for once to choose bad examples, for good reasons. 
Yes, there is a secret seduction even in all these things which arouse 
compassion and cry out for help, for our own way is so hard and 
demanding and so far from love and gratitude of others that we are by 
no means reluctant to escape from it, from it and our ownmost 
conscience - and take refuge in the conscience of the others and in 
the lovely temple of the 'religion of compassion'. As soon as any war 
breaks out, precisely the noblest men in the population immediately 
begin to experience a delight which is, to be sure, kept secret: they 
throw themselves rapturously into the new <langer of death because it 
seems to offer them that long-desired permission - the permission to 
deviate from their goal; war offers them a detour to suicide, but a 
detour with a good conscience. And, although I will keep quiet here 
about some things, I do not wish to keep quiet about my morality, 
which tells me: Live in seclusion so that you are able to live for 
yourself! Live in ignorance of what seems most important to your age! 
Lay at least the skin of three hundred years between you and today! 
And let the clamour of today, the noise of war and revolutions, be but 
a murmur to you. You will also want to help - but only those whose 
distress you properly understand because they share with you one 
suffering and one hope - your friends - and only in the way you help 

Book Four: St Januarius 
yourself: I want to make them braver, more persevering, simpler, more 
full of gaiety. I want to teach them what is today understood by so 
few, least of all by these preachers of compassion (Mitleiden): to share 
not pain, but joy (Mitfreude)! 
339 
Vita femina.28 - Not even all knowledge and all good will suffice for 
seeing the ultimate beauties of a work; it requires the rarest of lucky 
accidents for the clouds that veil the peaks to lift for us momentarily 
and for the sun to shine on them. Not only must we stand in just the 
right spot to see this, but our own soul, too, must itself have pulled the 
veil from its heights and must have been in need of some external 
expression and parable, as if it needed a hold in order to retain control 
of itself. But so rarely does all of this coincide that I am inclined to 
believe that the highest peaks of everything good, be it work, deed, 
humanity, or nature, have so far remained hidden and covered from the 
majority and even from the hest. But what does unveil itself for us 
unveils itself for us only once! The Greeks, to be sure, prayed: 'Everything 
beautiful twice and thrice!'29 lndeed, they had good reason to summon 
the gods, for ungodly reality gives us the beautiful either never or only 
once! I mean to say that the world is brimming with beautiful things but 
nevertheless poor, very poor in beautiful moments and in the unveilings 
of those things. But perhaps that is the strongest magic of life: it is 
covered by a veil of beautiful possibilities, woven with threads of gold -
promising, resisting, bashful, mocking, compassionate, and seductive. 
Yes, life is a woman! 
340 
The dying Socrates.30 - I admire the courage and wisdom of Socrates in 
everything he did, said - and did not say. This mocking, love-sick 
monster and pied piper of Athens, who made the most audacious youths 
of Athens tremble and sob, was not only the wisest chatterer of all time; 
he was equally great in silence. I wish he had remained silent also in 
28 'Life - a woman' 
29 Plato, Gorgias 498e and Philebus 59e-6oa 
30 See also above, § 36, p. 54-
193 

The Cay Science 
the last moments of his lif e - per haps he would then belong to a still 
higher order of minds. Whether it was death or the poison or piety or 
malice - something loosened his tongue and he said: 'O Crito, I owe 
Asclepius a rooster.' This ridiculous and terrible 'last word' means for 
those who have ears: 'O Crito, lift is a disease.'31 Is it possible that a 
man like him, who had lived cheerfully and like a soldier in plain view 
of everyone, was a pessimist? He had merely kept a cheerful demea­
nour while all his life hiding his ultimate judgement, his inmost 
feeling! Socrates, Socrates suffered from lift! And then he still avenged 
himself - with this veiled, gruesome, pious, and blasphemous saying. 
Did a Socrates really need revenge? Was there one ounce too little 
magnanimity in his overabundant virtue? - 0 friends! We must 
overcome even the Greeks! 
341 
The heaviest weight. - What if some day or night a <lemon were to 
steal into your loneliest loneliness and say to you: 'This life as you 
now live it and have lived it you will have to live once again and 
innumerable times again; and there will be nothing new in it, but 
every pain and every joy and every thought and sigh and everything 
unspeakably small or great in your life must return to you, all in the 
same succession and sequence - even this spider and this moonlight 
between the trees, and even this moment and I myself. The eternal 
hourglass of existence is turned over again and again, and you with it, 
speck of dust!' Would you not throw yourself down and gnash your 
teeth and curse the <lemon who spoke thus? Or have you once 
experienced a tremendous moment when you would have answered 
him: 'You are a god, and never have I heard anything more divine.' If 
this thought gained power over you, as you are it would transform 
and possibly crush you; the question in each and every thing, 'Do you 
want this again and innumerable times again?' would lie on your 
actions as the heaviest weight! Or how well disposed would you have 
31 See Plato, Phaedo 116-18, esp. 118a.5-8. Asclepius was the god ofhealing and a rooster would 
have been a usual thank-offering to him from someone whom he had cured of an illness. 
Nietzsche's interpretation of what Socrates said was not standard in the ancient world, and 
became common only in the Renaissance. It is rejected by some modem scholars. 
194 

Book Four: St Januarius 
to become to yourself and to life to long for nothing more fervently than 
for this ultimate eternal confirmation and seal? 
342 
Incipit tragoedia. 32 - When Zarathustra 33 was thirty years old, he left his 
homeland and Lake Urmi and went into the mountains. There he 
enjoyed his spirit and solitude, and did not tire of that for ten years. But 
at last his heart changed - and one morning he arose with rosy dawn, 
stepped before the sun, and spoke to it thus: 'You great heavenly body! 
What would your happiness be if you did not have those for whom you 
shine! For ten years you have climbed up to my cave; without me, my 
eagle, and my snake, you would have become tired of your light and of 
this road; but we awaited you every morning, relieved you of your 
overabundance, and blessed you for it. Behold, I am sick of my wisdom, 
like a bee that has collected too much honey; I need outstretched hands; 
I would like to give away and distribute until the wise among humans 
once again enjoy their folly and the poor once again their riches. For 
that I must step into the depths, as you do in the evening when you go 
behind the sea and bring light even to the underworld, you over-rich 
heavenly body! Like you I must go under, as it is called by the human 
beings to whom I want to descend. So bless me then, you calm eye that 
can look without envy upon all-too-great happiness! Bless the cup that 
wants to overflow in order that the water may flow golden from it and 
everywhere carry the reflection of your bliss! Behold, this cup wants to 
become empty again, and Zarathustra wants to become human again.' 
Thus began Zarathustra's going under. 
32 'The tragedy begins'. At this point, on completing Book 1v, Nietzsche went on to write Also 
S prach Zarathustra ( Thus S poke Zarathustra ), the most prophetic in style among his philoso­
phical works, in 1883-5. He added Book v to The Cay Science in 1887. 
33 Nietzsche takes the name from that of the Persian religious thinker of the seventh/ sixth century 
B c who propagated a strongly dualistic doctrine, sharply distinguishing between good and evil. 
195 

Book Five 
We Fearless Ones 
Carcasse, tu trembles? 
Tu tremblerais bien davantage, si tu savais 
Oll je te mene. 
Turenne 
'Carcass, you tremble? You'd tremble even more if you knew where I'm taking you.' Henri de 
Latour d'Auvergne, Vicomte de Turenne (1611-75) was one of the most successful generals of 
the French King Louis XIV. 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
343 
How to understand our cheerfulness. - The greatest recent event - that 
'God is dead'; that the belief in the Christian God has become 
unbelievable - is already starting to cast its first shadow over Europe. To 
those few at least whose eyes - or the suspicion in whose eyes is strong 
and subtle enough for this spectacle, some kind of sun seems to have set; 
some old deep trust turned into doubt: to them, our world must appear 
more autumnal, more mistrustful, stranger, 'alder'. But in the main one 
might say: for many people's power of comprehension, the event is itself 
far too great, distant, and out of the way even for its tidings to be 
thought of as having arrived yet. Even less may one suppose many to 
know at all what this event really means - and, now that this faith has 
been undermined, how much must collapse because it was built on this 
faith, leaned on it, had grown into it - for example, our entire European 
morality. This long, dense succession of demolition, destruction, down­
fall, upheaval that now stands ahead: who would guess enough of it 
today to play the teacher and herald of this monstrous logic of horror, 
the prophet of deep darkness and an eclipse of the sun the like of which 
has probably never befare existed on earth? Even we horn guessers of 
riddles who are so to speak on a lookout at the top of the mountain, 
posted between today and tomorrow and stretched in the contradiction 
between today and tomorrow, we firstlings and premature births of the 
next century, to whom the shadows that must soon envelop Europe 
really should have become apparent by now - why is it that even we look 
forward to this darkening without any genuine involvement and above 
all without worry and fear for ourselves? Are we perhaps still not too 
influenced by the most immediate consequences of this event - and these 
immediate consequences, the consequences for ourselves, are the oppo­
site of what one might expect - not at all sad and gloomy, but much 
more like a new and barely describable type of light, happiness, relief, 
amusement, encouragement, dawn . . . Indeed, at hearing the news that 
'the old god is dead', we philosophers and 'free spirits' feel illuminated 
by a new dawn; our heart overflows with gratitude, amazement, 
forebodings, expectation - finally the horizon seems clear again, even if 
not bright; finally our ships may set out again, set out to face any 
<langer; every daring of the lover of knowledge is allowed again; the sea, 
our sea, lies open again; maybe there has never been such an 'open sea'. 
1 99 

The Cay Science 
344 
In what way we, too, are still pious. - In science, convictions have no 
right to citizenship, as one says with good reason: only when they decide 
to step down to the modesty of a hypothesis, a tentative experimental 
standpoint, a regulative fiction, 1 may they be granted admission and 
even a certain value in the realm of knowledge - though always with the 
restriction that they remain under police supervision, under the police 
of mistrust. But doesn't this mean, on doser consideration, that a 
conviction is granted admission to science only when it ceases to be a 
conviction? Wouldn't the cultivation of the scientific spirit begin when 
one permitted oneself no more convictions? That is probably the case; 
only we need still ask: in order that this cultivation begin, must there not 
be some prior conviction - and indeed one so authoritative and 
unconditional that it sacrifices all other convictions to itself? We see that 
science, too, rests on a faith; there is simply no 'presuppositionless' 
science. The question whether truth is necessary must get an answer in 
advance, the answer 'yes', and moreover this answer must be so firm 
that it takes the form of the statement, the belief, the conviction: 
'Nothing is more necessary than truth; and in relation to it, everything 
else has only secondary value.' This unconditional will to truth - what 
is it? Is it the will not to let oneself be deceived? Is it the will not to 
deceive? For the will to truth could be interpreted in this second way, too 
- if 'I do not want to deceive myself' is included as a special case under 
the generalization 'I do not want to deceive.' But why not deceive? But 
why not allow oneself to be deceived? Note that the reasons for the 
former lie in a completely different area from those for the latter: one 
does not want to let oneself be deceived because one assumes it is 
harmful, dangerous, disastrous to be deceived; in this sense science 
would be a long-range prudence, caution, utility, and to this one could 
justifiably object: How so? Is it really less harmful, dangerous, disas­
terous not to want to let oneself be deceived? What do you know in 
advance about the character of existence to be able to decide whether 
the greater advantage is on the side of the unconditionally distrustful or 
of the unconditionally trusting? But should both be necessary - a lot of 
trust as well as a lot of mistrust - then where might science get the 
1 See Kant, Critique of Pure Reason B 670, 799. 
200 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
unconditional belief or conviction on which it rests, that truth is more 
important than anything else, than every other conviction? Precisely this 
conviction could never have originated if truth and untruth had 
constantly made it clear they they were both useful, as they are. So, the 
faith in science, which after all undeniably exists, cannot owe its origin 
to such a calculus of utility; rather it must have originated in spite of the 
faet that the disutility and dangerousness of 'the will to truth' or 'truth 
at any price' is proved to it constantly. 'At any price': we understand this 
well enough once we have off ered and slaughtered one faith after 
another on this altar! Consequently, 'will to truth' does not mean 'I do 
not want to let myself be deceived' but - there is no alternative - 'I will 
not deceive, not even myself'; and with that we stand on moral ground. 
For you have only to ask yourself carefully, 'Why do you not want to 
deceive?' especially if it should seem - and it does seem! - as if life 
aimed at semblance, i.e. error, deception, simulation, blinding, self­
blinding, and when life on the largest scale has actually always shown 
itself to be on the side of the most unscrupulous polytropoi.2 Charitably 
interpreted, such a resolve might perhaps be a quixotism, a slight, 
enthusiastic folly; but it could also be something worse, namely a 
principle that is hostile to life and destructive. 'Will to truth' - that 
could be a bidden will to death. Thus the question 'Why science?' leads 
back to the moral problem: Why morality at all, if life, nature, and 
history are 'immoral'? No doubt, those who are truthful in that 
audacious and ultimate sense which faith in science presupposes thereby 
affirm another world than that of life, nature, and history; and insofar as 
they affirm this 'other world', must they not by the same token deny its 
counterpart, this world, our world? ... But you will have gathered what I 
am getting at, namely, that it is still a metaphysical faith upon which our 
faith in science rests - that even we knowers of today, we godless anti­
metaphysicians, still take our fire, too, from the flame lit by the 
thousand-year old faith, the Christian faith which was also Plato's faith, 
that God is truth; that truth is divine ... But what if this were to 
become more and more difficult to believe, if nothing more were to turn 
out to be divine except error, blindness, the lie - if God himself were to 
turn out to be our longest lie? 
2 'sly, knowing all the tricks, devious'. Nietzsche uses the plural of this word which in the singular 
is used in the Odyssey (e.g. Book I, line 1) to describe Odysseus. 
201 

The Cay Science 
345 
Morality as a problem. - The lack of personality always takes its revenge: 
a weakened, thin, extinguished personality, one that denies itself and its 
own existence, is no longer good for anything good - least of all for 
philosophy. 'Selflessness' has no value in heaven or on earth; all great 
problems demand great love, and only strong, round, secure minds who 
have a firm grip on themselves are capable of that. It makes the most 
telling difference whether a thinker has a personal relationship to his 
problems and finds in them his destiny, his distress, and his greatest 
happiness, or an 'impersonal' one, meaning he is only able to touch and 
grasp them with the antennae of cold, curious thought. In the latter case 
nothing will come of it, that much can be promised; for even if great 
problems should let themselves be grasped by them, they would not 
allow frogs and weaklings to hold on to them; such has been their taste 
from time immemorial - a taste, incidentally, that they share with all 
doughty females. Why, then, have I never yet encountered anyone, not 
even in books, who approached morality in this personal way and who 
knew morality as a problem, and this problem as his own personal 
distress, torment, voluptuousness, and passion? It is clear that up to 
now, morality has been no problem at all but rather that on which, after 
all mistrust, discord, and contradiction, one could agree - the hallowed 
place of peace where thinkers took a rest from themselves, took a deep 
breath, and felt revived. I see no one who has ventured a critique of 
moral valuations; I miss even the slightest attempts of scientific curi­
osity, of the coddled, experimental imagination of psychologists and 
historians that easily anticipates a problem and seizes it in flight without 
knowing what it has caught. I have hardly detected a few meagre 
preliminary efforts to explore the history of origins of these feelings and 
valuations (which is something quite different from a critique and again 
diff erent from a history of ethical systems): in one single case I did 
everything to encourage a sympathy and talent for this kind of history -
in vain, as it seems to me today. 3 These historians of morality (particu­
larly, the Englishmen) do not amount to much: usually they themselves 
unsuspectingly stand under the command of a particular morality and, 
3 Probably a reference to Dr Paul Ree (1849-1901), author of Der Ursprung der moralischen 
Empfindungen (1877) and Die Entstehung des Gewissens (1885). Nietzsche refers again to Ree in the 
Preface to 'On the Genealogy ofMorality' (Cambridge, 1994). 
202 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
without knowing it, serve as its shield-bearers and followers, for 
example, by sharing that popular superstition of Christian Europe 
which people keep repeating so naively to this day, that what is 
characteristic of morality is selflessness, self-denial, self-sacrifice, or 
sympathy (Mitgefohl) and compassion (Mitleiden). Their usual mistaken 
premise is that they affirm some consensus among peoples, at least 
among tame peoples, concerning certain moral principles, and then 
conclude that these principles must be unconditionally binding also for 
you and me - or, conversely, they see that among different peoples 
moral valuations are necessarily different and infer from this that no 
morality is binding - both of which are equally childish. The mistake of 
the more subtle among them is that they uncover and criticize the 
possibly foolish opinions of a people about their morality, or of 
humanity about all human morality - opinions about its origin, its 
religious sanction, the myth of the free will and such things - and then 
think they have criticized the morality itself. But the value of the 
injunction 'Thou Shalt' is still fundamentally different from and 
independent of such opinions about it and the weeds of error that may 
have overgrown it - just as surely as the value of a medication for 
someone sick is totally independent of whether he thinks about medi­
cine scientifically or the way an old woman thinks about it. A morality 
could even have grown out of an error, and the realization of this faet 
would not as much as touch the problem of its value. Thus no one until 
now has examined the value of that most famous of all medicines called 
morality; and for that, one must begin by questioning it for once. Well 
then! Precisely that is our task. 
Our question mark. - But you do not understand this? lndeed, people 
will have trouble understanding us. We are searching for words, perhaps 
also for ears. Who are we anyway? lf we simply called ourselves godless 
(to use an old expression), or unbelievers, or even immoralists, we 
would not think that these words came near to describing us: we are all 
three of them, at too advanced a stage for anyone to comprehend - for 
you to comprehend, my curious gentlemen -how it feels. No! No longer 
with the bitterness and passion of the one who has torn himself away 
and must turn his unbelief into another faith, a goal, a martyrdom! We 
203 

The Cay Science 
have become hard-boiled, cold, and tough in the realization that the way 
of the world is not at all divine - even by human standards it is not 
rational, merciful, or just. We know it: the world we live in is ungodly, 
immoral, 'inhuman'; for far too long we have interpreted it falsely and 
mendaciously, though according to our wish and will for veneration, 
that is, according to a need. For man is a venerating animal! But he is 
also a mistrustful one; and that the world is not worth what we thought 
is about the most certain thing our mistrust has finally gotten hold of. 
The more mistrust, the more philosophy. We take care not to claim that 
the world is worth less; indeed, it would seem laughable to us today if 
man were to aim at inventing values that were supposed to surpass the 
value of the real world. That is exactly what we have turned away from, 
as from an extravagant aberration of human vanity and unreason that 
for long was not recognized as such. It found its final expression in 
modem pessimism, and an older and stronger expression in the teaching 
of Buddha; but also Christianity includes it, more doubtfully and 
ambiguously, to be sure, but not for that reason less seductively. The 
whole attitude of 'man against the world', of man as a 'world-negating' 
principle, of man as the measure of the value of things, as judge of the 
world who finally places existence itself on his scales and finds it too 
light - the monstrous stupidity of this attitude has finally dawned on us 
and we are sick of it; we laugh we soon as we encounter the juxtaposition 
of 'man and world', separated by the sublime presumptuousness of the 
little word 'and!' But by laughing, haven't we simply taken contempt for 
man one step further? And thus also pessimism, the contempt for that 
existence which is knowable to us? Have we not exposed ourselves to the 
suspicion of an opposition - an opposition between the world in which 
until now we were at home with our venerations - and which may have 
made it possible for us to endure life - and another world that we 
ourselves are: a relentless, fundamental, deepest suspicion concerning 
ourselves that is steadily gaining more and worse control over us 
Europeans and that could easily confront coming generations with the 
terrible Either/Or: 'Either abolish your venerations or - yourselves!' 
The latter would be nihilism; but would not the former also be -
nihilism? That is our question mark. 
204 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
347 
Believers and their need to believe. - The extent to which one needs a 
faith in order to flourish, how much that is 'firm' and that one does not 
want shaken because one clings to it - that is a measure of the degree of 
one's strength (or, to speak more clearly, one's weakness). Christianity, it 
seems to me, is still needed by most people in old Europe even today; 
hence it still finds believers. For that is how man is: an article of faith 
could be refuted to him a thousand times; as long as he needed it, he 
would consider it 'true' again and again, in accordance with that famous 
'proof of strength' 4 of which the Bible speaks. Metaphysics is still 
needed by some, but so is that impetuous demand for certainty that today 
discharges itself in scientific-positivistic form among great masses - the 
demand that one wants by all means something to be firm (while owing 
to the fervour of this demand one treats the demonstration of this 
certainty more lightly and negligently): this is still the demand for 
foothold, support - in short, the instinct of weakness that, to be sure, 
does not create sundry religions, forms of metaphysics, and convictions 
but does - preserve them. lndeed, around all these positivistic systems 
hover the fumes of a certain pessimistic gloom, something of a 
weariness, fatalism, disappointment, fear of new disappointment - or 
else self-dramatizing rage, a bad mood, the anarchism of exasperation 
and whatever other symptoms or masquerades there are of the feeling of 
weakness. Even the vehemence with which our cleverest contemporaries 
get lost in pitiful nooks and crevices such as patriotism (I refer to what 
the French call chauvinisme5 and the Germans 'German'), or in petty 
aesthetic creeds such as French naturalism (which enhances and exposes 
only the part of nature that simultaneously disgusts and amazes - today 
one likes to call it la verite vraie6 - ), or in Petersburg-style nihilism 7 
(meaning faith in unbelief to the point of martyrdom), always indicates 
primarily the need for faith, a foothold, backbone, support ... Faith is 
4 See 1 Corinthians 2:4. Originally this seems to have referred to the view that Christianity was 
true because it was possible effectively to cure illnesses and drive out demons by invoking the 
name of Jesus. By the eighteenth century (in Germany) the doctrine had been transformed into 
the view that Christianity was true because firm belief in Jesus gave the believer power in the 
form of an optimistic attitude towards life that would make it possible to cope effectively with 
adversity. 
5 'jingoistic xenophobia' 
6 'true truth' 
7 see Turgenev (1818-83) Fathers and Sons (1862); Dostoyevsky, The Possessed. 
205 

The Cay Science 
always most desired and most urgently needed where will is lacking; for 
will, as the affect of command, is the decisive mark of sovereignty and 
strength. That is, the less someone knows how to command, the more 
urgently does he desire someone who commands, who commands 
severely - a god, prince, the social arder, doctor, father conf essor, 
dogma, or party conscience. From this one might gather that both world 
religions, Buddhism and Christianity, may have owed their origin and 
especially their sudden spread to a tremendous sickening of the will. And 
that is actually what happened: both religions encountered a demand for 
a 'Thou Shalt' that, through a sickening of the will, had increased to an 
absurd level and bordered on desperation; both religions were teachers 
of fanaticism in times of a slackening of the will and thereby offered 
innumerable people support, a new possibility of willing, a delight in 
willing. For fanaticism is the only 'strength of the will' that even the 
weak and insecure can be brought to attain, as a type of hypnosis of the 
entire sensual-intellectual system to the benefit of the excessive nourish­
ment (hypertrophy) of a single point of view and feeling which is now 
dominant - the Christian calls it his faith. Once a human being arrives 
at the basic conviction that he must be commanded, he becomes 'a 
believer'; conversely, one could conceive of a delight and power of self­
determination, a freedom of the will, in which the spirit takes leave of all 
faith and every wish for certainty, practised as it is in maintaining itself 
on light ropes and possibilities and dancing even beside abysses. Such a 
spirit would be the free spirit par excellence. 
On the origin of scholars. - In Europe the scholar grows out of all kinds of 
classes and social conditions like a plant that requires no particular kind 
of soil: thus he belongs, essentially and involuntarily, to the bearers of 
the democratic idea. But this origin betrays itself. Once one has some­
what trained one's eye to recognize in a scholarly hook, in a scientific 
treatise, the scholar's intellectual idiosyncrasy - every scholar has one -
and catch it in the aet, one will almost always behind it come face to face 
with the scholar's 'prehistory', his family, especially its occupations and 
crafts. Where the feeling, 'This is now proven; I am done with it,' is 
expressed, it is usually the ancestor in the blood and instincts of the 
scholar who from his standpoint approves of 'the finished job' - the 
206 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
faith in a proof is only the symptom of what in a hard-working family 
for ages has been considered 'good work'. An example: the sons of all 
types of clerks and office workers, whose main task was always to 
organize various diff erent kinds of material, to compartmentalize and in 
general to schematize, when they become scholars, show a tendency to 
consider a problem practically solved when they have merely schema­
tized it. There are philosophers who are basically just schematizers - for 
them, the formal aspect of their fathers' occupation has become content. 
The talent for classifications, for tables of categories, reveals something: 
one pays the price for being the child of one's parents. The son of a 
lawyer will also, as a researcher, have to be a lawyer; he primarily wants 
his cause to win; secondarily perhaps also for it to be right. The sons of 
Protestant ministers and schoolteachers one recognizes by the naive 
certainty with which, as scholars, they take their case already to have 
been proven when they have merely stated it heartily and warmly; they 
are thoroughly used to being believed, as that was part of their father's 
craft. A Jew, on the other band, in keeping with the characteristic 
occupations and the past of his people, is not at all used to being 
believed. Consider Jewish scholars in this light: they all have a high 
regard for logic, that is for compelling agreement by force of reasons; 
they know that with logic, they are bound to win even when faced with 
class and race prejudices, where people do not willingly believe them. 
For nothing is more democratic than logic: it knows no regard for 
persons and takes even the crooked nose for straight. (lncidentally, 
Europe owes the Jews no small thanks for making its people more 
logical, for cleanlier intellectual habits - none more so than the 
Germans, as a lamentably deraisonnable8 race that even today first needs 
to be given a good mental drubbing. Wherever Jews have gained 
influence, they have taught people to make finer distinctions, draw more 
rigorous conclusions, and to write more clearly and cleanly; their task 
was always 'to make a people "listen to raison" '.) 
349 
Once again, the origin of the scholars. - To wish to preserve oneself is a 
sign of distress, of a !imitation of the truly basic life-instinct, which aims 
8 'unreasonable' 
207 

The Cay Science 
at the expansion of power and in so doing often enough risks and sacrifices 
self-preservation. It is symptomatic that certain philosophers, such as 
the consumptive Spinoza, took and indeed had to take just the so-called 
self-preservation instinct to be decisive:9 - they were simply people in 
distress. That today's natural sciences have become so entangled with 
the Spinozistic dogma (most recently and crudely in Darwinism with its 
incredibly one-sided doctrine of 'the struggle for existence' - ) is 
probably due to the descent of most natural scientists: in this regard 
they belong to 'the people', their ancestors were poor and lowly folks 
who knew all too intimately the difficulty of seraping by. English 
Darwinism exudes something like the stuffy air of English overpopula­
tion, like the small people's smell of indigence and overcrowding. As a 
natural scientist, however, one should get out of one's human corner; 
and in nature, it is not distress which rules, but rather abundance, 
squandering - even to the point of absurdity. The struggle for survival 
is only an exception, a temporary restriction of the will to life; the great 
and small struggle revolves everywhere around preponderance, around 
growth and expansion, around power and in accordance with the will to 
power, which is simply the will to life. 
350 
In honour of the homines religiosi.10 - The struggle against the church is 
certainly, among other things - for it means many things - also the 
struggle of the baser, meaner, more cheerful, more confiding, more 
superficial natures against the dominion of the graver, deeper, and more 
contemplative, that is, more evil and distrustful individuals who, with a 
long-standing suspicion about the value of existence, also brooded over 
their own worth: the base instinct of the people, its sensuality, its 'good 
heart', rebelled against them. The entire Roman Church rests on a 
Southern <listrust of human nature which is always misunderstood in 
the North. The European South has inherited this suspicion from the 
deep Orient, from ancient mysterious Asia and its contemplation. 
Protestantism is, to be sure, an uprising in favour of the upright, the 
guileless, the shallow (the North has always been more good-natured 
and superficial than the South); but it was the French Revolution that 
9 Spinoza, Ethica, Book IV, props. 18-25 (esp. Scholium to prop. 18) 
IO 'religious people' 
208 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
finally and ceremoniously handed over the sceptre to the 'good people' 
(to the sheep, the donkey, the goose, and everything that is incurably 
shallow and loudmouthed and ripe for the madhouse of 'modem ideas'). 
351 
In honour of the priestly type: - I think that what the people mean by 
wisdom (and who today is not 'people'?) - that prudent, cowlike 
serenity, piety and country parson meekness which lies in the meadow 
and earnestly and ruminantly observes life - is also that from which 
precisely the philosophers have always felt the most remote, probably 
because they were not 'people' enough, not country parsons enough. 
They will presumably also be the last to learn to believe that the people 
might come to understand something of that which is most remote from 
them, something of the great passion of the knowledge-seeker who 
steadfastly lives, must live, in the thundercloud of the highest problems 
and the weightiest responsibilities (and thus in no way as an observer, 
outside, indifferent, secure, objective ... ). The people venerate quite 
another type of person when they construct for themselves an ideal of 
the 'sage', and they have a thousandfold right to adore just this type of 
person with the hest words and honours - the mild, serious/ simple­
minded and chaste priestly natures and whatever is related to them: 
they are the ones who are the objects of approbation when the common 
people reveres wisdom. And towards whom would the people have more 
reason to show themselves grateful than these men, who belong to and 
come from them, though as consecrated, chosen, sacrificed for the 
common good - they believe themselves sacrificed to God - , to whom 
the people can spill their hearts with impunity and get rid of their 
secrets, worries and worse ( - for he who 'unbosoms' himself is relieved 
of himself, and he who has 'confessed', forgets). Here reigns a great 
necessity: drainages and their clean, cleansing waters are needed also for 
the spiritual refuse; swift streams of love are needed, and strong, 
humble, pure hearts who prepare and sacrifice themselves for such an 
office of non-public health care - for it is a sacrifice; a priest is and 
remains a human sacrifice ... The people see such sacrificed, subdued, 
serious persons of 'faith' as wise, that is, as having become knowing, as 
'certain' in relation to their own uncertainty; and who would want to 
deprive them of this word and of their awe? But as is conversely fair, 
209 

The Cay Science 
among philosophers a priest, too, is considered to be one of 'the people' 
and not a knower, primarily because philosophers do not themselves 
believe in 'men of knowledge' and already smell 'the people' in this 
belief and superstition. It was modesty that in Greece coined the word 
'philosopher' and left the extraordinary insolence of calling oneself wise 
to the actors of the spirit - the modesty of such monsters of pride and 
conceit as Pythagoras, as Plato - . 
352 
The extent to which morality is hardly dispensable. - The naked human 
being is generally a disgraceful sight - I am talking about us Europeans 
(and not even about female Europeans!). Supposing that by the mis­
chievous trick of a sorcerer, the merriest dinner party suddenly saw 
itself exposed and undressed; I think not only the mirth would be lost 
but also the strongest appetite discouraged, - it seems we Europeans are 
utterly unable to dispense with that masquerade called clothing. But 
why should there not be equally good reasons for the disguise of 'moral 
men', for their veil of moral formulas and notions of decency, for the 
whole benevolent concealment of our actions behind the concepts of 
duty, virtue, public spirit, respectability, self-denial? I am not supposing 
that something like human malice and perfidy - in short, the bad wild 
beast in us - is thereby disguised; my thought is, quite on the contrary, 
that it is precisely as tame animals that are we a disgraceful sight and 
need the disguise of morality, - that the 'inner man' in Europe is not 
nearly evil enough to be able to 'show himself' that way (and be beautiful 
that way - ). The European disguises himself with morality because he 
has become a sick, sickly, maimed animal which has good reasons for 
being 'tame'; because he is almost a monstrosity, something half, weak, 
awkward .. .It is not the ferocity of the beast of prey that needs a moral 
disguise, but the herd animal with its deep mediocrity, fear, and 
boredorn with itself. Morality dresses up the European - let's admit it! -
into something nobler, grander, goodlier, something 'divine' -
353 
On the origin of religions. - The true invention of the religion-founders is 
first to establish a certain way of life and everyday customs that work as 
210 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
a disciplina voluntatis11 while at the same time removing boredorn; and 
then to give just this life an interpretation that makes it appear 
illuminated by the highest worth, so that henceforth it becomes a good 
for which one fights and under certain circumstances even gives one's 
life. Actually, the second invention is the more important: the first, the 
way of life, was usually already in place, though alongside other ways of 
life and without any consciousness of its special worth. The significance, 
the originality of the religion-founder usually lies in his seeing and 
selecting this way of life, in his guessing for the first time what it can be 
used for and how it can be interpreted. Jesus (or Paul), for example, 
discovered the life of the small people in the Roman province, a humble, 
virtuous, depressed life: he explained it, he put the highest meaning and 
value into it - and thereby also the courage to despise every other way of 
life, the silent Moravian brotherhood 12 fanaticism, the clandestine 
subterranean self-confidence that grows and grows and is finally ready 
to 'overcome the world' (i.e. Rome and the upper classes throughout the 
empire). Buddha likewise discovered, scattered indeed among all classes 
and social strata of his people, that type of person who is good and 
gracious (above all, inoffensive) out of laziness and who, also from 
laziness, lives abstinently and with nearly no needs at all: he understood 
how such a type of person would inevitably, with all of his vis inertiae, 13 
have to roll into a faith that promises to prevent the return of earthly toil 
(i.e. of work and action in general), - this 'understanding' was his 
genius. The religion-founder must be psychologically infallible in his 
knowledge of a certain average breed of souls who have not yet 
recognized one another as allies. He is the one who brings them together; 
and to that extent, the establishment of a religion always turns into a 
long festival of recognition. -
354 
On 'the genius of the species'. - The problem of consciousness ( or rather, 
of becoming conscious of something) first confronts us when we begin 
to realize how much we can do without it; and now we are brought to 
1 l 'discipline of the will' 
12 A Christian religious group founded in 1722 in the town ofHerrnhut (Germany). Members of 
the group de-emphasized technical points of religious doctrine and theology in favour of 
individual emotional experience and fraternal forms of living. 
13 'force of inertia' 
211 

The Cay Science 
this initial realization by physiology and natural history (which have 
thus required two hundred years to catch up with Leibniz 's precocious 
suspicion). 14 For we could think, feel, will, remember, and also 'aet' in 
every sense of the term, and yet none of all this would have to 'enter our 
consciousness' (as one says figuratively). All of life would be possible 
without, as it were, seeing itself in the mirror; and still today, the 
predominant part of our lives actually unfolds without this mirroring -
of course also our thinking, feeling, and willing lives, insulting as it may 
sound to an older philosopher. To what end does consciousness exist at 
all when it is basically superfluous? If one is willing to hear my answer 
and its possibly extravagant conjecture, it seems to me that the subtlety 
and strength of consciousness is always related to a person's (or 
animal's) ability to communicate; and the ability to communicate, in turn, 
to the need to communicate. The latter should not to be taken to mean 
that precisely that individual who is a master at expressing his needs 
and at making them understood must also be the most dependent on 
others in his needs. But for entire races and lineages, this seems to me to 
hold: where need and distress have for a long time forced people to 
communicate, to understand each other swiftly and subtly, there finally 
exists a surplus of this power and art of expression, a faculty, so to 
speak, which has slowly accumulated and now waits for an heir to spend 
it lavishly (the so-called artists are the heirs, as well as the orators, 
preachers, writers - all of them people who come at the end of a long 
chain, each of them 'bom late' in the best sense of the term, and each of 
them, again, squanderers by nature). Assuming this observation is 
correct, I may go on to conjecture that consciousness in general has 
developed only under the pressure of the need to communicate; that at the 
outset, consciousness was necessary, was useful, only between persons 
(particularly between those who commanded and those who obeyed); 
and that it has developed only in proportion to that usefulness. 
Consciousness is really just a net connecting one person with another -
only in this capacity did it have to develop; the solitary and predatory 
person would not have needed it. That our actions, thoughts, feelings, 
and movements - at least some of them - even enter into consciousness 
is the result of a terrible 'must' which has ruled over man for a long 
time: as the most endangered animal, he needed help and protection, he 
14 German philosopher (1646-1716) who held that we had perceptions of which we were not 
aware; see his Monadology, § 14-
212 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
needed his equals; he had to express his neediness and be able to make 
himself understood - and to do so, he first needed 'consciousness', i.e. 
even to 'know' what distressed him, to 'know' how he felt, to 'know' 
what he thought. For, once again: man, like every living creature, is 
constantly thinking but does not know it; the thinking which becomes 
conscious is only the smallest part of it, let's say the shallowest, worst 
part - for only that conscious thinking takes place in words, that is, in 
communication symbols; and this faet discloses the origin of conscious­
ness. In short, the development of language and the development of 
consciousness (not of reason but strictly of the way in which we become 
conscious of reason) go hand in hand. One might add that not only 
language serves as a bridge between persons, but also look, touch, and 
gesture; without our becoming conscious of our sense impressions, our 
power to fix them and as it were place them outside of ourselves, has 
increased in proportion to the need to convey them to others by means of 
signs. The sign-inventing person is also the one who becomes ever more 
acutely conscious of himself; for only as a social animal did man learn to 
become conscious of himself - he is still doing it, and he is doing it 
more and more. My idea is clearly that consciousness actually belongs 
not to man's existence as an individual but rather to the community­
and herd-aspects of his nature; that accordingly, it is finely developed 
only in relation to its usefulness to community or herd; and that 
consequently each of us, even with the best will in the world to 
understand ourselves as individually as possible, 'to know ourselves', will 
always bring to consciousness precisely that in ourselves which is 'non­
individual', that which is 'average'; that due to the nature of conscious­
ness - to the 'genius of the species' governing it - our thoughts 
themselves are continually as it were outvoted and translated back into 
the herd perspective. At bottom, all our actions are incomparably and 
utterly personal, unique, and boundlessly individual, there is no doubt; 
but as soon as we translate them into consciousness, they no longer seem 
to be . .. This is what I consider to be true phenomenalism and 
perspectivism: that due to the nature of animal consciousness, the world 
of which we can become conscious is merely a surface- and sign-world, 
a world turned into generalities and thereby debased to its lowest 
common denominator, - that everything which enters consciousness 
thereby becomes shallow, thin, relatively stupid, general, a sign, a 
herd-mark; that all becoming conscious involves a vast and thorough 
213 

The Cay Science 
corruption, falsification, superficialization, and generalization. In the 
end, the growing consciousness is a <langer; and he who lives among the 
most conscious Europeans even knows it is a sickness. As one might 
guess, it is not the opposition between subject and object which 
concerns me here; I leave that distinction to those epistemologists who 
have got tangled up in the snares of grammar (of folk metaphysics). 
Even less am I concerned with the opposition between 'thing in itself' 
and appearance: for we 'know' far too little to even be entitled to make 
that distinction. We simply have no organ for knowing, for 'truth': we 
'know' (or believe or imagine) exactly as much as is useful to the human 
herd, to the species: and even what is here called 'usefulness' is finally 
also just a belief, a fiction, and perhaps just that supremely fatal 
stupidity of which we some day will perish. 
355 
The origin of our concept of 'knowledge '. - I take this explanation from the 
street; I heard one of the common people say 'he knew me right away' -
and I asked myself: what do the people actually take knowledge to be? 
what do they want when they want 'knowledge'? Nothing more than 
this: something unfamiliar is to be traced back to something familiar. 
And we philosophers - have we really meant anything more by knowl­
edge? The familiar means what we are used to, so that we no longer 
marvel at it; the commonplace; some rule in which we are stuck; each 
and every thing that makes us feel at home: - And isn't our need for 
knowledge precisely this need for the familiar, the will to uncover 
among everything strange, unusual, and doubtful something which no 
longer unsettles us? Is it not the instinct of fear that bids us to know? 
And isn't the rejoicing of the person who attains knowledge just 
rejoicing from a regained sense of security? ... Take the philosopher 
who imagined the world to be 'known' when he had reduced it to the 
'idea'; wasn't it precisely because the 'idea' was so familiar to him and 
he was so used to it? because he no longer feared the 'idea'? - How little 
these men of knowledge demand! Just look at their principles and their 
solutions to the world riddle with this in mind! When they find 
something in, under, or behind things which unfortunately happens to 
be very familiar to us, such as our multiplication table or our logic or 
our willing and desiring, how happy they are right away! For 'what is 
214 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
familiar is known': on this they agree. Even the most cautious among 
them assume that the familiar can at least be more easily known than the 
strange; that for example sound method demands that we start from the 
'inner world', from the 'facts of consciousness', because this world is 
more familiar to us. Error of errors! The familiar is what we are used to, 
and what we are used to is the most difficult to 'know' - that is, to view 
as a problem, to see as strange, as distant, as 'outside us' ... The great 
certainty of the natural sciences in comparison with psychology and the 
critique of the elements of consciousness - with the unnatural sciences, 
one might almost say - rests precisely on the faet that they take the 
strange as their object, while it is nearly contradictory and absurd even 
to want to take the not-strange as one's object ... 
The extent to which things will become ever more 'artistic' in Europe. - Even 
today, in this transitional period in which so many forms of coercion have 
lost their power, the need to make a living still forces nearly all European 
men to adopt a particular role - their so-called profession. A few retain 
the freedom, an apparent freedom, to choose this role themselves; for 
most of them it is chosen. The result is strange enough. Almost all 
Europeans, at an advanced age, confuse themselves with their role; they 
become the victims of their 'good performance'; they themselves have 
forgotten how much they were determined by accidents, moods, and 
arbitrariness at the time that their 'profession' was decided - and how 
many other roles they may have been able to play; for now it is too late! 
U pon deeper consideration, the role has actually become character; and 
artifice, nature. There were times when men believed with unyielding 
confidence, even with piety, in their predestination for just this business, 
just this way of making a living, and utterly refused to acknowledge the 
element of accident, role, and caprice. With the help of this faith, 
estates, guilds, and inherited trade privileges were able to establish 
those monsters, the broad-based social pyramids that distinguished the 
middle ages and to which one can credit at least one thing: durability 
(and durability is a first-rank value on earth). But there are contrary 
ages, the truly democratic ones, in which people unlearn this faith and 
a certain audacious faith and opposite viewpoint moves steadily into the 
foreground - the Athenian faith that first became noticeable in the 
215 

The Cay Science 
Periclean age; 15 the American faith which is increasingly becoming the 
European faith as well, where the individual is convinced he can do just 
about anything and is up to playing any role; and everyone experiments 
with himself, improvises, experiments again, enjoys experimenting, 
where all nature ends and becomes art ... When the Greeks had fully 
accepted this faith in ro/es - the faith of artistes, if you will - they 
underwent, as is well known, step by step an odd metamorphosis that is 
not in every respect worthy of imitation: they really became actors; as 
such they captivated and overcame the whole world - finally even the 
'power that overcame the whole world' itself (for it was not, as innocents 
tend to say, Greek culture that conquered Rome, but the graeculus 
histrio16). But what I fear, what even today one could grasp with one's 
bands if one felt like grasping it, is that we modem men are pretty much 
on the same road; and every time man starts to <liseover the extent to 
which he is playing a role and the extent to which he can be an actor, he 
becomes an actor ... With this, a new human flora and fauna emerges that 
cannot grow in firmer and more limited ages - or that would at least be 
formally condemned and suspected of lacking honour; it is thus that the 
most interesting and maddest ages always emerge, in which 'the actors', 
all types of actors, are the real masters. Precisely because of this, 
another human type becomes ever more disadvantaged and is finally 
made impossible; above all, the great 'architects': the strength to build 
is now paralysed; the courage to make far-reaching plans is discouraged; 
the organizational geniuses become scarce - who still dares to undertake 
works that would require millennia to complete? For what is dying out is 
that fundamental faith on the basis of which someone could calculate, 
promise, anticipate the future in a plan on that grand scale, and sacrifice 
the future to his plan - namely, the basic faith that man has worth and 
sense only in so far as he is a stone in a great edifice; to this end he must 
be firm above all, a 'stone' ... above all not an actor! To put it briefly -
oh, people will keep silent about it for a long time! - what from now on 
will never again be built, can never again be built, is - a society in the 
old sense of the term; to build that, everything is lacking, mainly the 
material. We are all no longer material for a society; this is a timely truth! 
15 The mid-fifth century B c, named after Pericles, the Athenian statesman who was in power 
during that period and who was thought by some to embody some of its salient virtues. 
16 'little Greek actor'. 'Graeculus' ('little Greek') was used by Romans as a term of contempt; see 
Juvenal 3.78. 
216 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
It is a matter of indifference to me that at present the most short­
sighted, perhaps the most honest, at any rate the noisiest human type 
that we have today - our good socialists - believe, hope, dream, and 
above all shout and write pretty much the opposite. For even now one 
reads their slogan for the future 'free society' on all tables and walls. 
Free society? Well, well! But surely you know, gentlemen, what one 
needs to build that? Wooden iron!17 The famous wooden iron! And it 
need not even be wooden. . . 
357 
On the old problem: 'What is German?' - Add up for yourself the real 
achievements in philosophical thinking that can be attributed to 
Germans: is there any legitimate sense in which one can credit them to 
the entire race? Can we say that they are also the work of the 'German 
soul', or at least symptoms of it in the same sense in which we are 
accustomed to take Plato's ideomania, his nearly religious lunacy about 
forms, as a development and testimony of 'the Greek soul'? Or would 
the opposite be true? Would they be just so individual, just so much 
exceptions to the spirit of the race as was, for instance, Goethe's 
paganism with a good conscience? Or as is Bismarck's Machiavellianism 
with a good conscience, his so-called Realpolitik, among Germans? 
Might our philosophers perhaps even contradict the need of the 
'German soul'? In short, were the German philosophers really -
philosophical Germans? I recall three cases. First, Leibniz 's incomparable 
insight18 that has been vindicated not only against Descartes but also 
against everyone who had philosophized before him - that conscious­
ness (Bewuf]theit)19 is merely an accidens20 of the power of representa­
tion ( Vorstellung) and not its necessary and essential attribute; so that 
what we call consciousness (Bewuf]tsein) constitutes only one state of 
our spiritual and psychic world (perhaps a sick state) and by no means the 
whole of it - is there something German to this idea, the profundity of 
which has not been exhausted to this day? Is there reason to surmise 
that no Latin could easily have thought of this reversal of appearances? 
17 Common expression in German for something that cannot exist, like 'square circle'. 
18 See above, Book v, footnote 14, p. 212. 
19 See above, Book 1, footnote 6, p. 37. 
20 'accident' in the sense of 'inessential property' 
217 

The Cay Science 
For it is a reversal. Let us recall, secondly, Kant's colossal question mark 
that he placed on the concept 'causality' 21 - without, like Hume, 
doubting its legitimacy altogether: he started much more cautiously to 
delimit the realm in which this concept makes any sense whatsoever 
(and to this day we have not yet come to terms with this marking out of 
the boundaries). Let us take, thirdly, Hegel's astonishing move, with 
which he struck through all logical habits and indulgences when he 
dared to teach that species concepts develop out of each other:22 with this 
proposition the minds of Europe were preformed for the last great 
scientific movement, Darwinism - for without Hegel there could be no 
Darwin. Is there anything German in this Hegelian innovation which 
first introduced the decisive concept of 'development' into science? Yes, 
without any doubt: in all three cases we feel that something in ourselves 
has been 'uncovered' and figured out, and we are grateful and at the 
same time surprised. Each of these three propositions is a thoughtful 
piece of German self-knowledge, self-experience, and self-conception. 
'Our inner world is much richer, more comprehensive, more hidden', 
we feel with Leibniz. As Germans, we doubt with Kant the ultimate 
validity of the discoveries of the natural sciences and altogether of 
everything that can be known causaliter23 - what is knowable already 
seems to us of less value on that account. We Germans are Hegelians 
even had there been no Hegel, insofar as we (as opposed to all Latins) 
instinctively attribute a deeper meaning and greater value to becoming 
and development than to what 'is'; we hardly believe in the justification 
of the concept 'being' - and also insofar as we are not inclined to 
concede that our human logic is logic as such or the only kind of logic 
(we would rather persuade ourselves that it is only a special case and 
perhaps one of the oddest and stupidest). A fourth question would be 
whether Schopenhauer, too, with his pessimism - that is, the problem of 
the value of existence24 - had to be precisely a German. I believe not. 
The event after which this problem was to be expected with certainty, so 
that an astronomer of the soul could have calculated the very day and 
hour for it - the decline of the faith in the Christian god, the triumph of 
scientific atheism - is a pan-European event in which all races had their 
21 See Kant's Preface to Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics (1783). 
22 See Hegel's Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences (1830 edn), § 368 (especially the Zusatz). 
23 'causally' 
24 See Schopenhauer, World as Will and Representation vol. I, Book 4, and vol. li, chapters 46 and 
49. 
218 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
share and for which all deserve credit and honour. Conversely, one 
might charge precisely the Germans - those Germans who were 
contemporaries of Schopenhauer - with having delayed this triumph of 
atheism most dangerously for the longest time. Hegel in particular was a 
delayer par excellence, in accordance with his grandiose attempt to 
persuade us of the divinity of existence, appealing as a last resort to our 
sixth sense, 'the historical sense'. As a philosopher, Schopenhauer was 
the first admitted and uncompromising atheist among us Germans: this 
was the background of his enmity towards Hegel. The ungodliness of 
existence counted for him as something given, palpable, indisputable; he 
always lost his philosopher's composure and became indignant when he 
saw anyone hesitate or beat around the bush on this point. This is the 
locus of his whole integrity; unconditional and honest atheism is simply 
the presupposition of his way of putting the problem, as a victory of the 
European conscience won finally and with great difficulty; as the most 
fateful aet of two thousand years of discipline for truth that in the end 
forbids itself the lie of faith in God ... One can see what it was that 
actually triumphed over the Christian god: Christian morality itself, the 
concept of truthfulness that was taken ever more rigorously; the father 
confessor's refinement of the Christian conscience, translated and 
sublimated into a scientific conscience, into intellectual cleanliness at 
any price. Looking at nature as if it were proof of the goodness and care 
of a god; interpreting history in honour of some divine reason, as a 
continual testimony of a moral world order and ultimate moral pur­
poses; interpreting one's own experiences as pious people have long 
interpreted theirs, as if everything were providential, a hint, designed 
and ordained for the sake of salvation of the soul - that is over now; that 
has conscience against it; every refined conscience considers it to be 
indecent, dishonest, a form of mendacity, effeminacy, weakness, cow­
ardice. With this severity, if with anything, we are simply good 
Europeans and heirs of Europe's longest and most courageous self­
overcoming. As we thus reject Christian interpretation and condemn its 
'meaning' as counterfeit, Schopenhauer's question immediately comes at 
us in a terrifying way: Does existence have any meaning at all? A few 
centuries will be needed before this question can ever be heard 
completely and in its full depth. What Schopenhauer himself said in 
answer to this question was - forgive me - something hasty, youthful, a 
mere compromise, a way of remaining and staying stuck in precisely 
219 

The Cay Science 
those Christian and ascetic moral perspectives in which one had 
renounced faith along with the faith in God. But he posed the question -
as a good European, as I said befare, and not as a German. Or is it 
possible that at least the manner in which the Germans appropriated 
Schopenhauer's question proves that the Germans did have an inner 
affinity and relation, preparation, and need for this problem? That after 
Schopenhauer one thought and printed things in Germany, too - by the 
way, late enough - about the problem he had posed is certainly not 
sufficient to decide in favour of this doser affinity. One might rather 
adduce the peculiar ineptitude of this post-Schopenhauerian pessimism 
against the thesis; clearly the Germans did not behave in this affair as if 
they were in their element. This is by no means an allusion to Eduard 
von Hartmann. 25 On the contrary, to this day I have not shaken off my 
old suspicion that he is too apt for us. I mean that he may have been a 
real rogue from the start who perhaps made fun not only of German 
pessimism - but in the end he might even reveal to the Germans in his 
last will and testament to what extent it was possible to make fools of 
them, even in an era of economic initiative and success. 26 But let me ask 
you: should we perhaps consider that old humming-top Bahnsen27 as a 
credit to the Germans, seeing how voluptuously he revolved his life 
around his real-dialectical misery and 'personal bad luck'? Might 
precisely that be German? (I herewith recommend his writings to the 
end for which I have used them myself, as an anti-pessimistic diet, 
especially on account of their elegantiae psychologicae,28 with which, I 
think, they should be effective also for the most constipated bowels and 
temperaments.) Or could one count such dilettantes and old spinsters as 
that mawkish apostle of virginity, Mainliinder,29 as a genuine German? 
In the end he must have been a Jew (all Jews become mawkish when 
they moralize). Neither Bahnsen nor Mainliinder, nor even Eduard von 
Hartmann, gives us any clear evidence regarding the question whether 
Schopenhauer's pessimism, his horrified look into a de-deified world 
25 Nineteenth-century German philosopher who drew eclectically on both Hegel and Schopen­
hauer to develop a pessimistic 'philosophy of the unconscious' 
26 The r 870s were a period of such economic prosperity that they are sometimes referred to as the 
'Era ofFoundations' (ofvarious business enterprises). 
27 Deservedly forgotten nineteenth-century German philosopher 
28 'psychological elegance' 
29 In his Philosophie der Erltisung (2 vols., 1876-7): Phillip Batz - 'Mainliinder' is a pseudonym -
makes much of the virtues of virginity (and of suicide). He committed suicide when the second 
volume of this work appeared, at the age of thirty-five. 
220 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
that had become stupid, blind, crazed, and questionable, his honest 
horror ... was not merely an exception among Germans but a German 
event. Everything else that is otherwise in the foreground - our brave 
politics, our merry fatherlandishness which resolutely enough consider 
all matters with a view to a not very philosophical principle ('Deutsch­
land, Deutschland tiber alles'30), i.e. sub specie speciei,31 namely the 
German species, bears emphatic witness to the opposite. No, the 
Germans of today are no pessimists. And Schopenhauer was a pessimist, 
to repeat, as a good European and not as a German. -
The peasant rebellion of the spirit. - We Europeans confront a world of 
tremendous ruins. A few things are still towering; much looks decayed 
and uncanny, while most things are already lying on the ground: 
picturesque enough - where has one ever seen more beautiful ruins? -
and overgrown by large and small weeds. The Church is this city of 
decline: we see the religious society of Christianity shaken to its lowest 
foundations; faith in God has collapsed; faith in the Christian-ascetic 
ideal is still fighting its last battle. An edifice such as Christianity that 
had been built so carefully over such a long period - it was the last 
Roman construction! - could of course not be destroyed all at once. All 
kinds of earthquakes had to shake it; all kinds of minds ( Geist) that drill, 
dig, gnaw, and moisten have had to help. But the oddest thing is: those 
who exerted themselves the most to preserve and conserve Christianity 
have become its hest destroyers - the Germans. It seems that the 
Germans do not understand the nature of a church. Are they not 
spiritual enough for that? Not mistrustful enough? The edifice of the 
Church rests, at any rate, on a Southern freedom and liberality of the 
3° First line of a poem written in 1841 by Hoffmann von Fallersleben. At the time of its 
composition 'Germany' was no more than a geographical expression for a congeries of 
independent political entities. In this context the words were a call to put national unification -
the creation of a 'Germany' - above all regional and local political loyalties. Once unification was 
attained (in 1871), the words could come to bear amore aggressive meaning in an international 
context ('Let Germany be above all other nations'). In 1797 Haydn had composed a melody, 
deriving it from an existing Croatian folktune, which he used to set the words 'Gott erhalte 
Franz den Kaiser' ('God Save Kaiser Franz'). Until 1918 this was the anthem of the Austro­
Hungarian Empire. In 1922 Fallersleben's poem was put together with Haydn's melody and the 
result proclaimed the German National Anthem. 
31 'from the point of view of the species' 
221 

The Cay Science 
mind as well as on a Southern suspicion against nature, man, and spirit; 
it rests on an altogether different knowledge and experience of man than 
the North has had. The Lutheran Reformation was, in its whole 
breadth, the indignation of simplicity against 'multiplicity', to speak 
cautiously, a crude, naively narrow-minded misunderstanding in which 
there is much to forgive. One failed to understand the expression of a 
victorious church and saw only corruption; one misunderstood the noble 
scepticism, that luxury of scepticism and tolerance which every victor­
ious, self-confident power permits itself ... Today one overlooks easily 
enough how in all cardinal questions of power Luther was dangerously 
short-sighted, superficial, incautious - mainly as a man of the common 
people who lacked any inheritance from a ruling caste and instinct for 
power; thus his work, his will to restore that work of the Romans only 
became the beginning of a work of destruction, without his wanting and 
knowing it. With honest wrath he unravelled, he tore up what the old 
spider had woven so carefully for such a long time. He surrendered the 
holy books to everyone - thus they finally ended up in the bands of the 
philologists, who are the destroyers of every faith that rests on books. 
He destroyed the concept of the 'Church' by throwing away the belief 
in the inspiration of the church councils; for the concept of the 
'Church' retains power only under the condition that the inspiring 
spirit that founded the Church still lives in, builds, and continues to 
build its house. He gave back to the priest sexual intercourse with a 
woman; but three-quarters of the reverence of which the people, 
especially the women of the people, are capable rests on the faith that a 
person who is an exception in this regard will be an exception in other 
regards as well - it is here precisely that the popular faith in something 
superhuman in man, in the miracle, in the redeeming god in man, finds 
its subtlest and most insidious advocate. Having given the priest 
woman, Luther had to take from him auricular confession; that was 
psychologically right, but with that development the Christian priest 
was basically abolished, since his deepest utility has always been that he 
was a holy ear, a silent well, a grave for secrets. 'Everyone his own 
priest' - behind such formulas and their peasant cunning was bidden in 
Luther the abysmal hatred of 'the higher human beings' and the 
dominion of 'the higher human beings' as conceived by the Church; he 
smashed an ideal that he could not attain, while he seemed to fight and 
abhor the degeneration of this ideal. Actually he, the impossible monk, 
222 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
pushed away the dominion of the homines religiosi,32 and thus he himself 
brought about within the ecclesiastical social order what in relation to the 
civil social order he attacked so intolerantly - a 'peasants' rebellion'. 
What grew out of his Reformation afterwards, good as well as bad, 
might be roughly calculated today; but who would be naive enough to 
praise or blame Luther on account of these consequences? He is 
innocent of everything; he did not know what he was doing. The 
flattening of the European mind, particularly in the North-its becoming 
more good-natured, if one prefers a moral term - advanced a large step 
with the Lutheran Reformation, there is no doubt; and owing to it also 
the flexibility and restlessness of the mind, its thirst for independence, 
its faith in a right to liberty, its 'naturalness'. If in connection with this 
last point one wanted to give it the credit for having prepared and 
favoured what we today honour as 'modem science', one must surely 
add that it also shares the blame for the degeneration of the modem 
scholar, for his lack of reverence, shame, and depth, for the whole naive 
guilelessness and conventionality in matters of knowledge - in short for 
that plebeianism of the spirit that is peculiar to the last two centuries and 
from which even pessimism has not yet liberated us. 'Modem ideas' also 
belong to this peasant rebellion of the North against the colder, more 
ambiguous, mistrustful spirit of the South that built its greatest monu­
ment in the Christian Church. Let us not forget in the end what a 
church is, specifically as opposed to any 'state'. A church is above all a 
structure for ruling that secures the highest rank to the more spiritual 
human beings and that believes in the power of spirituality to the extent 
of forbidding itself the use of all cruder instruments of force; and on 
that score alone the Church is under all circumstances a nobler institu­
tion than the state. 
359 
The revenge against the spirit and other ulterior motives of morality. 
Morality - where do you suppose that it finds its most dangerous and 
insidious advocates?. . . There is a human being who has tumed out 
badly, who does not have spirit enough to be able to enjoy it and just 
enough education to know this; bored, weary, a self-despiser; wealthy 
32 'religious people' 
223 

The Cay Science 
through inheritance, he is deprived even of the last comfort, 'the 
blessings of work', self-forgetfulness in 'daily labour'. Such a person 
who is basically ashamed of his existence - perhaps he also harbours a 
few small vices - and on the other hand cannot keep himself from 
becoming more spoiled and touchy as a result of reading books he has 
no right to or through more spiritual company than he can digest: such 
a thoroughly poisoned human being - for spirit becomes poison, 
education becomes poison; ownership becomes poison, loneliness 
becomes poison in persons who have turned out badly in this way -
eventually ends up in a state of habitual revenge, the will to revenge ... -
What do you think he finds necessary, absolutely necessary, to give 
himself in his own eyes the appearance of superiority over more spiritual 
people and to obtain the pleasure of an accomplished revenge at least in 
his own imagination? Always morality; you can bet on that. Always hig 
moral words. Always the boom-boom of justice, wisdom, holiness, 
virtue. Always the Stoicism of gesture (how well Stoicism conceals what 
one lacks!). Always the cloak of prudent silence, of affability, of 
mildness, and whatever the other idealistic cloaks may be called under 
which incurable self-despisers, as well as the incurably vain, go about. 
Do not misunderstand me: among such horn enemies of the spirit 
emerges occasionally the rare piece of humanity that the people revere 
under such names as saint and sage. From among such men come those 
monsters of morality who make noise, who make history - St Augus­
tine33 is among them. Fear of spirit, revenge against spirit - oh how 
often have these propelling vices become the roots of virtues! lndeed, 
become virtues! And, as a question asked in confidence: even that 
philosopher's claim to wisdom which has been made here and there on 
earth; the maddest and most immodest of all claims - was it not always, 
in India as well as in Greece, primarily a hiding place? At times per haps a 
hiding place chosen with pedagogical intent, which hallows so many 
lies; one has a tender regard for those who are still becoming, growing -
for disciples who must often be defended against themselves through 
faith in a person (through an error) .. .In most cases, however, it is a 
hiding place in which the philosopher saves himself owing to weariness, 
age, growing cold, hardening - as a wisdom of that instinct which the 
animals have before death - they go off alone, become silent, choose 
33 North African rhetorician, theologian and bishop (AD 354-430) 
224 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
solitude, crawl into caves, become wise . .. What? Wisdom as a hiding 
place in which the philosopher hides himself from - spirit? 
360 
Two kinds of causes that are often confused. - This seems to me to be one 
of my most essential steps forward: I learned to distinguish the cause of 
acting from the cause of acting in a certain way, in a certain direction, 
with a certain goal. The first kind of cause is a quantum of dammed-up 
energy waiting to be used somehow, for something; the second kind, by 
contrast, is something quite insignificant, mostly a small accident in 
accordance with which this quantum 'discharges' itself in one particular 
way: the match versus the powder keg. Among these small accidents 
and matches I consider all so-called 'purposes' as well as the even more 
so-called 'vocations': they are relatively random, arbitrary, nearly in­
different in relation to the enormous force of energy that presses on, as I 
said, to be used up somehow. The usual view is diff erent: one is used to 
seeing the driving force precisely in the goals (purposes, professions, 
etc.), in keeping with a very ancient error; but it is only the directing 
force - one has mistaken the helmsman for the stream. And not even 
always the helmsman, the driving force .. .Is the 'goal', the 'purpose', 
not often enough a beautifying pretext, a self-deception of vanity after 
the faet that does not want to acknowledge that the ship is foliowing the 
current into which it has entered accidentally? That it 'wills' to go that 
way because it - must? That it certainly has a direction but - no 
helmsman whatsoever? We still need a critique of the concept of 
'purpose'. 
On the problem of the actor. - The problem of the actor has troubled me 
fora very long time; I was unsure (and still sometimes am) whether it is 
only from this angle that one can approach the dangerous concept of the 
'artist' - a concept that has heretofore been treated with unpardonable 
generosity. Falseness with a good conscience; the delight in pretence 
erupting as a power that pushes aside, floods, and at times extinguishes 
one's so-called 'character'; the inner longing fora role and mask, for an 
appearance (Schein); an excess of capacities for all kinds of adaptation 
225 

The Cay Science 
that can no longer be satisfied in the service of the nearest, most 
narrowly construed utility - perhaps all of this is distinctive not only of 
the actor? Such an instinct will have developed most easily in lower­
class families who had to survive under fluctuating pressures and 
coercions, in deep dependency; who had nimbly to cut their coats 
according to their cloth, always readapting to new circumstances, always 
having to aet and pose differently until they slowly learned to turn their 
coats with every wind and thus almost turned into coats themselves -
and masters of an art which they have fully assimilated so that it is an 
integral part of themselves, that art of perpetually playing at self­
concealment which in animals we call mimicry - until finally this 
capacity, accumulated from generation to generation, becomes domi­
neering, unreasonable, intractable, an instinct that learns to command 
other instincts and produces the actor, the 'artist' (the buffoon, the 
teller of lies, the fool, the jester, the clown primarily, but also the 
classical servant, Gil Blas;34 for it is in such types that we find the pre­
history of the artist and often enough even of'genius'). In more elevated 
social conditions, too, a similar human type develops under similar 
pressures; only here, the histrionic instinct is usually just barely kept in 
check by another instinct, as in the case of 'diplomats'. Incidentally, I 
would think that a good diplomat would be free at any time to become a 
good actor - provided, of course, that he were 'free' to do this. But as 
for the Jews, that people possessing the art of adaptability par excellence, 
one might, according to this train of thought, immediately see in them a 
world-historical organization for the cultivation of actors, a veritable 
breeding ground for actors; and indeed it is really high time to ask: what 
good actor today is not - a Jew? Also the Jew as ahorn literary man, as 
the true master of the European press, exercises this power by virtue of 
his histrionic ability, for the literary man is essentially an actor: he plays 
the 'expert', the 'specialist'. Finally, women: consider the whole history 
of women - mustn 't they be actresses first and foremost? Listen to 
doctors who have hypnotized womenfolk; finally, love them - let 
yourself be 'hypnotized' by them! What is always the result? That they 
try to be 'taken for something' even when they are being taken ... 
Woman is so artistic. . . 
34 See above, Book 11, footnote 9, p. 78. 
226 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
Our faith in the masculinization of Europe. - We owe it to Napoleon (and 
not at all to the French Revolution, which aimed at the 'brotherhood' of 
peoples and a general, blooming exchange of hearts) that a few warlike 
centuries, incomparable to any other in history, are likely to follow in 
succession - in short, that we have entered the classic age of war, of 
sophisticated yet popular war on the !argest scale (in terms of weapons, 
talents, discipline); all coming ages will look back on this kind of war 
with envy and deep respect as something perfect, for the national 
movement out of which this war glory is growing is merely the counter­
shock against Napoleon and would not exist without Napoleon. He 
should be credited one day for having enabled man in Europe to become 
the master over the businessman and the philistine - perhaps even over 
'woman', who has been spoiled by Christianity and the enthusiastic 
spirit of the eighteenth century, and even more by 'modem ideas'. 
Napoleon, who saw something of a personal enemy in modem ideas and 
in civilization itself,35 proved through this enmity to be one of the 
greatest continuators of the Renaissance: he brought back a whole piece, 
a block of granite, perhaps the decisive one, of antiquity's essence. And 
who knows whether this piece of antiquity's essence will finally again 
become master of the national movement, and whether it must not make 
itself the heir and protractor in an affirmative sense of Napoleon - who 
wanted one Europe, as is known, and wanted it as mistress of the earth. -
How each sex has its own prejudice about love. - Despite all the 
concessions I am willing to make to the prejudice favouring monogamy, 
I will never admit talk of equal rights for man and woman in love: there 
are none. For man and woman have different conceptions of love - and 
it belongs to the conditions of love in each sex that neither presupposes 
the same feeling, the same concept of 'love' in the other. What woman 
means by love is clear enough: total devotion (and not mere surrender) 
with soul and body, without any consideration or reserve, rather with 
shame and horror at the thought of a devotion that might be tied to 
35 See above, Book 1, footnote 16, p. 49. In this case see vol. I, p. 112. 
227 

The Cay Science 
special clauses or conditions. In this absence of conditions her love is a 
faith: woman has no other. Man, when he loves a woman, wants precisely 
this love from her and is thus himself as far as can be from the 
presupposition of female love; supposing, however, that there should 
also be men to whom the desire for complete surrender is not alien, 
well, then they are - not men. A man who loves like a woman becomes a 
slave, but a woman who loves like a woman becomes a more perfect 
woman ... The passion of a woman, in its unconditional renunciation 
of her own rights, presupposes precisely that on the other side there is 
not an equal pathos, not an equal will to renunciation; for if both should 
renounce themselves from love, the result would be - well, I don't 
know, maybe an empty space? Woman wants to be taken, adopted as a 
possession, wants to be absorbed in the concept 'possession', 'pos­
sessed'; consequently, she wants someone who takes, who does not 
himself give or give himself away; who on the contrary is supposed 
precisely to be made richer in 'himself' - through the increase in 
strength, happiness, and faith given him by the woman who gives 
herself. Woman gives herself away; man takes more - I do not believe 
one can get around this natura! opposition through any social contracts 
or with the hest will to justice, desirable as it may be not to remind 
oneself constantly how harsh, terrible, enigmatic, and immoral this 
antagonism is. For love, when one considers it in its perfect, fully 
developed state, is nature, and nature is eternally 'immoral'. Faithful­
ness is then implicit in woman's love, and follows from its definition; in 
a man's case it could perhaps arise as a consequence of his love, for 
instance as gratitude or as an idiosyncrasy of taste, a so-called 'elective 
affinity', but it does not belong to the essence of his love. Indeed this is so 
little the case that one might almost speak with some justification of a 
natura! back-and-forth between love and faithfulness in a man: his love 
is desire for possession and not a renunciation or giving away, but with 
possession desire for possession always ceases ... In faet it is the highly 
refined and suspicious thirst for possession on the part of a man who 
rarely and only after a long time admits that he has 'possession', which 
allows his love to endure. Thus it is possible that his love continues to 
grow even after surrender - he will not easily admit that a woman has 
nothing more to 'give up' to him. 
228 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
The hermit speaks. - The art of dealing with people depends essentially 
on the skill (requiring much practice) to accept and eat a meal prepared 
in a kitchen you don't trust. If you come to the table ravenous, all is easy 
('the worst company makes itself felt' - as Mephistopheles says);36 but 
one is never that hungry when one needs to bel Oh, how hard it is to 
digest one's fellow men! First principle: as in the face of misfortune, to 
engage your courage, to spring boldly to action, to admire yourself in 
the process, to sink your teeth into your reluctance, to swallow your 
disgust. Second principle: to 'improve' your fellow man, e.g. by praising 
him so as to make him start sweating out his pleasure in himself, or by 
taking hold of a corner of his good or 'interesting' qualities and pulling 
at it until all the virtue comes out and you can hide your fellow man in 
its folds. Third principle: self-hypnosis. To fixate on your object of 
association as if on a glass button until you stop feeling pleasure and 
displeasure in this activity and fall asleep without noticing it, become 
rigid, and attain equanimity: a home remedy amply tested in marriage 
and friendship, praised as indispensable but not yet scientifically 
analysed. Its popular name is - patience. 
The hermit speaks again. - We, too, deal with 'people'; we, too, modestly 
don the cloak in which (as which) others know us, respect us, seek us, 
and so we appear in company, i.e. among others who are disguised but 
don't want to admit it. Like all elever masks we, too, politely prop up a 
chair against the door when confronted with curiosity about anything 
but our 'cloak'. But there are other ways and tricks for 'wandering 
amongst', for 'associating with', people: for instance, as a ghost - which 
is highly advisable if one desires to get rid of them quickly and make 
them afraid. Example: others reach for us and can't get a hold of us. 
That's frightening. Or we enter through a closed door. Or when all the 
lights are out. Or when we're already dead. The latter is the trick 
of posthumous people par excellence. ('And what were you thinking?' 
one of them once said impatiently; 'Would we wish to endure this 
36 Goethe, Faust I, line 1637; the line continues: ' ... that you are a human being among humans'. 
229 

The Cay Science 
estrangement, coldness, and sepulchral silence enveloping us, this entire 
subterranean, bidden, mute, undiscovered loneliness that we call life 
but might as well be called death unless we knew what will become of us 
and that it is only after death that we come into our life and become alive 
- oh, very much alive, we posthumous onesl') 
Faced with a scholarly hook. - We are not among those who have ideas 
only between books, stimulated by books - our habit is to think 
outdoors, walking, jumping, climbing, dancing, preferably on lonely 
mountains or right by the sea where even the paths become thoughtful. 
Our first question about the value of a book, a person, or a piece of 
music is: 'Can they walk?' Even more, 'Can they dance?' We rarely read; 
but are none the worse on that account - and oh, how quickly we guess 
how someone has come to his ideas; whether seated befare the inkwell, 
stomach clenched, head bowed over the paper; and oh, how soon we're 
done with his book! Cramped intestines betray themselves - you can bet 
on it - no less than stuffy air, closed ceilings, cramped spaces. - Those 
were my feelings just now as I closed a decent, scholarly book - grateful, 
very grateful, but also relieved ... In a scholar's book there is nearly 
always something oppressive, oppressed: the 'specialist' emerges 
somehow - his eagerness, his seriousness, his ire, his overestimation of 
the nook in which he sits and spins, his hunchback- every specialist has 
his hump. Every scholarly book also reflects a soul that has become 
crooked; every craft makes crooked. Look at the friends of your youth 
again, af ter they have taken possession of their speciality ( Wissenschaft) 
- Aias, in every case the reverse has also taken place! How they are now 
for all time possessed and obsessed by it! Grown into their corner, 
squashed beyond recognition, unfree, unstable, completely emaciated 
and jagged except for one spot that is paradigmatically round - one is 
moved and silenced when one sees them again that way. Above every 
craft, even one with a golden floor, is also a leaden ceiling that presses 
and presses on the soul until it becomes strangely and crookedly 
pressed. There is nothing to do about this. Don't think you can evade 
such crippling through same educational artifice. One pays dearly for 
any kind of mastery on earth, where perhaps one pays too dearly for 
everything; one is master of one's trade at the price of also being its 
230 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
victim. But you want things to be different - 'cheaper', above all more 
comfortable - not so, my dear contemporaries? Well, if so, you instantly 
get something different: instead of the craftsman and master, you get 
the man of !etters, the dexterous, 'polydexterous' literary man who of 
course lacks the hunched back - notwithstanding the posture he 
assumes before you as the shop attendant of spirit and the 'bearer' of 
culture - the literary man of !etters, who really is nothing but who 
'represents' nearly everything, who acts and 'stands in for' the expert, 
who takes it upon himself in all modesty to make himself paid, 
honoured, and celebrated in place of the expert. No, my scholarly 
friends, I bless you even for your hunched backs! And for despising, as 
do I, the 'literary men' and culture parasites! And for not knowing how 
to make a business of the spirit! And for having opinions that cannot be 
translated into monetary terms! And for not representing anything that 
you are not! And because your only desire (Wille) is to become masters 
of your craft, with reverence for every type of mastery and competence 
and with ruthless rejection of anything specious, semi-genuine, mere­
tricious, virtuoso-like, demagogical, or histrionic in litteris et artibus37 -
of anything that cannot give you proof of its unconditional probity in 
discipline and prior training. (Not even genius can compensate for such 
a deficiency, however much it may blind people to it. One grasps this 
once one has watched our most talented painters and musicians up 
close, who nearly without exception manage through a cunning inven­
tiveness of manners, stop-gap devices, and even principles, to acquire 
artificially and belatedly the appearance of such probity, such solidity of 
schooling and culture - without, of course, managing to deceive 
themselves, to silence forever their bad conscience. For surely you 
know? All great contemporary artists suffer from a bad conscience ... ) 
The first distinction to draw regarding artworks. - Everything that is 
thought, written, painted, composed, even built and sculpted, belongs 
either to monologue art or to art before witnesses. The second category 
must also include the seemingly monologue art involving faith in God, 
the entire lyricism of prayer; for solitude does not yet exist to the pious 
37 'in arts and Jetters' 
231 

The Cay Science 
- this invention was first made by us, the godless. I know no deeper 
distinction in an artist's entire optics than this: whether he views his 
budding artwork ('himself') from the eye of the witness, or whether he 
'has forgotten the world', which is the essential feature of all monologue 
art - it is based on forgetting; it is the music of forgetting. 
368 
The cynic speaks. - My objections to Wagner's music are physiological 
objections: why disguise them with aesthetic formulas? My 'faet' is that 
I stop breathing easily once this music starts affecting me; that my foot 
immediately gets angry at it and revolts - it has a need for tempo, dance, 
march; it demands chiefly from music the raptures found in good 
walking, striding, leaping, and dancing - but doesn't my stomach 
protest, too? My heart? My circulation? My intestines? Do I not 
unnoticeably grow hoarse as I listen? And so I ask myself: what does my 
whole body actually want from music? lts own relief, I believe, as if all 
animal functions should be quickened by easy, bold, exuberant, self­
assured rhythms; as if iron, leaden life should be gilded by golden, 
good, tender harmonies. My melancholy wants to rest in the hiding­
places and abysses of perfection: that's what I need music for. What is the 
drama to me! The cramps of its moral ecstasies that give the 'people' 
satisfaction! The whole hocus-pocus of gestures of the actor! You will 
guess that I am essentially anti-theatrical - but Wagner was, conversely, 
essentially a man of the theatre and an actor, the most enthusiastic 
mimomaniac that ever existed, also as a musician. And, incidentally, if it 
was Wagner's theory that 'the drama is the end; the music is always 
merely its means', 38 his practice was always, from beginning to end, 'the 
attitude is the end; the drama, and music, too, is always merely its 
means'. Music as a means of clarification, strengthening, internalization 
of the dramatic gesture and the actor's appeal to the senses; and the 
Wagnerian drama a mere occasion for many dramatic attitudes! Beside 
all other instincts, he had the commanding instinct of a great actor in 
absolutely everything - and, as I said, also as a musician. I once made 
this clear to an upright Wagnerian, with some trouble; and I had reasons 
to add: 'Do be a bit more honest with yourself - after all, we're not at 
38 Wagner, Opera and Drama ( 18 50- 1 ), Introduction 
232 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
the theatre! At the theatre, one is honest only as a mass; as an individual 
one lies, lies to onesel( One leaves oneself at home when one goes to the 
theatre; one relinquishes the right to one's own tongue and choice, to 
one's taste, even to one's courage as one has it and exercises it within 
one's own four walls against god and man. No one brings the finest 
senses of his art to the theatre; nor does the artist who works for the 
theatre: there, one is people, public, herd, woman, pharisee, voting 
cattle, democrat, neighbour, fellow man; there, even the most personal 
conscience is vanquished by the leveiling magic of the "greatest 
number"; there, stupidity breeds lasciviousness and is contagious; there, 
the "neighbour" reigns; there, one becomes a neighbour'. (I forgot to 
mention my enlightened Wagnerian's retort to the physiological objec­
tions: 'So, you simply aren't healthy enough for our music?') 
Our coexistence. - Don't we have to admit to ourselves, we artists, that 
there exists an uncanny disparity within us; that in an odd way our taste 
and on the other hand our creative power stand each distinct from the 
other; each remains the way it is by itself, and each grows by itself; I 
mean each of these has completely different degrees and tempi of old, 
young, ripe, overblown, rotten? A musician, for instance, could spend a 
lifetime creating things that contradict what his spoiled listener's ear, 
listener's heart values, savours, prefers - he needn't even be aware of 
this contradiction! As experience shows with almost embarrassing 
regularity, one's taste can easily outgrow the taste of one's powers, even 
without thereby paralysing them and hindering their continued produc­
tivity. But the opposite can happen, too - and this is precisely what I'd 
like to call artists' attention to. A perpetually creative person, a 'mother' 
type in the grand sense of the term, someone who doesn't hear or know 
anything but the pregnancies and child-beds of his spirit anymore, who 
simply has no time to reflect on himself and on his work and to make 
comparisons, who no longer wants to exercise his taste and simply 
forgets it, i.e. lets it stand, lie, or fall - maybe such a person would 
finally produce works that far excel his own judgement, so that he utters 
inanities about them and himself - utters them and believes them. This 
seems to me to be almost the norm among fertile artists - nobody knows 
a child less well than his parents - and this is true, to take a colossal 
233 

The Cay Science 
example, even in the case of the whole world of Greek art and poetry: it 
never 'knew' what it had done. 
370 
What is romanticism? - It may be recalled, at least among my friends, 
that initially I approached the modern world with a few crude errors 
and over-estimations and, in any case, with hope. I understood - on the 
basis of who knows what personal experiences? - the philosophical 
pessimism of the nineteenth century as if it were a symptom of a higher 
force of thought, of more audacious courage, and of more victorious 
fullness of life than had characterized the eighteenth century, the age of 
Hume, Kant, Condillac, 39 and the sensualists: thus, tragic insight struck 
me as the distinctive luxury of our culture, its most precious, noblest 
and most dangerous squandering; but still, in view of its over-richness, 
as its permitted luxury. Similarly, I explained German music to myself as 
the expression of a Dionysian might of the German soul: I believed I 
heard in it the earthquake through which some pent-up primordial 
force is finally released - indifferent about whether it sets everything 
else which is called culture atremble.40 You see that what I misjudged 
both in philosophical pessimism and in German music was what 
constitutes its actual character - its romanticism. What is romanticism? 
Every art, every philosophy can be considered a cure and aid in the 
service of growing, struggling life: they always presuppose suffering and 
sufferers. But there are two types of sufferers: first, those who suffer 
from a superabundance of lift - they want a Dionysian art as well as a 
tragic outlook and insight into life; then, those who suffer from an 
impoverishment of lift and seek quiet, stillness, calm seas, redemption 
from themselves through art and insight, or else intoxication, paroxysm, 
numbness, madness. All romanticism in art and in knowledge fits the 
dual needs of the latter type, as did ( and do) Schopenhauer and Richard 
Wagner, to name the most famous and prominent romantics that I 
misunderstood at the time - not, incidentally, to their disadvantage, one 
might in all fairness concede. He who is richest in fullness of lif e, the 
Dionysian god and man, can allow himself not only the sight of what is 
terrible and questionable but also the terrible deed and every luxury of 
39 French empiricist philosopher (1715-80) 
40 Nietzsche expressed these views in The Birth ofTragedy from the Spirit of Music (1872). 
234 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
destruction, decomposition, negation; in his case, what is evil, non­
sensical, and ugly almost seems acceptable because of an overflow in 
procreating, f ertilizing forces capable of turning any desert into boun­
tiful farmland. Conversely, he who suffers most and is poorest in life 
would need mainly mildness, peacefulness, goodness in thought and in 
deed - if possible, also a god who truly would be a god for the sick, a 
'saviour'; as well as logic, the conceptual comprehensibility of existence 
- for logic soothes, gives confidence - in short, a certain warm, fear­
repelling narrowness and confinement to optimistic horizons. Thus I 
gradually came to understand Epicurus, the antithesis of a Dionysian 
pessimist, and equally the 'Christian', who really is simply a kind of 
Epicurean and, like him, essentially a romantic; and my vision grew 
keener for that most difficult and insidious form of backward inference 
with which the most mistakes are made - the inference from the work to 
the maker, from the ideal to the one who needs it, from every manner of 
valuation to the commanding need behind it. Nowadays I avail myself of 
this primary distinction concerning all aesthetic values: in every case I 
ask, 'Is it hunger or superabundance that have become creative here?' At 
first glance, a different distinction may appear more advisable - it's far 
more noticeable - namely, the question of whether the creation was 
caused by a desire for fixing, for immortalizing, for being, or rather by a 
desire for destruction, for change, for novelty, for future, for becoming. 
However, both types of desires prove ambiguous upon doser examina­
tion, and can be interpreted under the first scheme, which seems 
pref erable to me. The de sire for destruction, for change and for becoming 
can be the expression of an overflowing energy pregnant with the future 
(my term for this is, as is known, 'Dionysian'); but it can also be the 
hatred of the ill-constituted, deprived, and underprivileged one who 
destroys and must destroy because what exists, indeed all existence, all 
being, outrages and provokes him. To understand this feeling, take a 
close look at our anarchists. The will to immortalize also requires a dual 
interpretation. It can be prompted, first, by gratitude and love; art of 
such origin will always be an art of apotheosis, dithyrambic perhaps like 
Rubens;41 blissfully mocking like Hafis;42 bright and gracious like 
Goethe, spreading a Homeric light and splendour over all things. But it 
41 Flemish Baroque painter (1577-1640) 
42 Persian lyric poet of the fourteenth century; especially well-known in Germany because of 
Goethe's great partiality for his poetry 
235 

The Cay Science 
can also be the tyrannical will of someone who suffers deeply, who 
struggles, is tortured, and who would like to stamp as a binding law and 
compulsion what is most personal, singular, narrow, the real idiosyn­
crasy of his suffering, and who as it were takes revenge on all things by 
forcing, imprinting, branding his image on them, the image of his 
torture. The latter is romantic pessimism in its most expressive form, be it 
Schopenhauer's philosophy of will or Wagner's music - romantic 
pessimism, the last great event in the fate of our culture. (That there 
could be a completely different pessimism, a classical one - this intuition 
and vision belongs to me as inseparable from me, as my proprium43 and 
ipsissimum;44 only the word 'classical' offends my ears; it has become far 
too trite, round, and indistinct. I call this pessimism of the future - for 
it is coming! I see it coming! -Dionysian pessimism.) 
371 
We incomprehensible ones. - Have we ever complained about being 
misunderstood, misjudged, misidentified, defamed, misheard, and 
ignored? This is precisely our lot - oh, for a long time yet! Let's say 
until 1901, to be modest - this is also our distinction; we wouldn't 
honour ourselves enough if we wanted it otherwise. We are misidentified 
- for we ourselves keep growing, changing, shedding old hides; we still 
shed our skins every spring; we become increasingly younger, more 
future-oriented, taller, stronger; we drive our roots ever more power­
fully into the depths - into evil - while at the same time embracing the 
heavens ever more lovingly and broadly, and absorbing their light ever 
more thirstily with all our sprigs and leaves. Like trees we grow - it's 
hard to understand, like all life! - not in one place, but everywhere; not 
in one direction, but upwards and outwards and inwards and down­
wards equally; our energy drives trunk, branches, and roots all at once; 
we are no longer free to do anything individual, to be anything 
individual ... This is our lot, as I have said: we grow in height; and 
even if this should be our dark fate - for we dwell ever doser to the 
lightning! - well, we do not honour it less on that account; it remains 
that which we do not want to share, to impart: the dark fate of height, 
our fate. 
43 '(my) own' 44 '(my) ownmost' 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
372 
Why we are not idealists. - Formerly, philosophers feared the senses: is it 
possible that we have unlearned this fear all too much? Today we are all 
sensualists, we philosophers of the present and future, not in theory but 
in praxis, in practice.45 The former, however, saw the senses as trying to 
lure them away from their world, from the cold kingdom of 'ideas', to a 
dangerous Southern isle where they feared their philosophers' virtues 
would melt away like snow in the sun. 'Wax in the ear' was virtually a 
condition of philosophizing; a true philosopher didn't listen to life 
insofar as life is music; he denied the music of life - it is an old 
philosopher's superstition that all music is siren-music. 46 Today we are 
inclined to make the opposite judgement (which could itself be just as 
mistaken), namely, that ideas are worse seductresses than the senses, for 
all their cold, anaemic appearance and not even despite that appearance 
- they always lived off the 'blood' of the philosopher; they always 
drained his senses and even, if you believe it, his 'heart'. These old 
philosophers were heartless: philosophizing was always a kind of 
vampirism. When considering such figures, including even Spinoza, 
don't you feel something deeply enigmatic and strange? Don't you see 
the spectacle unfolding, this steady growing paler - this ever more 
ideally construed desensualization? Don't you sense in the background 
some long-concealed blood-sucker who starts with the senses and finally 
leaves behind and spares only bones and rattling? - I refer to categories, 
formulas, words (for, forgive me, what remained of Spinoza, amor 
intellectualis dei,47 is mere rattle, nothing more! What is amor; what deus, 
when they are missing every drop of blood?). In sum: all philosophical 
idealism until now was something like an illness, except where, as in 
Plato's case, it was the caution of an overabundant and dangerous 
45 If Nietzsche is trying to draw a distinction here between 'praxis' and 'practice', rather than just 
rhetorically repeating himself, it is not clear what the distinction is. 
46 In Odyssey Book x II Odysseus tells how he outwitted the sirens, female singers who lure passing 
sailors to their death by singing irresistibly. He says he had himself bo und to the mast of his ship 
so that he could hear the song, but could not do anything self-destructive, and that he had the 
ears of his crew stopped with wax so that they didn't hear the song at all, and continued to row 
undisturbed. Nietzsche refers to this story again in Beyond Good and Evi! § 230, where he 
speaks, very puzzlingly, of man standing 'before the rest of nature, with intrepid Oedipus eyes 
and sealed Odysseus ears ... ' Odysseus' ears were not sealed- but equally, Oedipus' eyes, at the 
end, could not see. 
47 'intellectual love of god'; see Ethics, Book v, props. 32-37. 
237 

The Cay Science 
health; the fear of overpowerful senses; the shrewdness of a shrewd 
Socratic. - Maybe we modems are not healthy enough to need Plato's 
idealism? And we don't fear the senses because -
373 
'Science' as prejudice. - It follows from the laws that govern rank­
ordering (Rangordnung) that scholars, insofar as they belong to the 
intellectual middle class, are not even allowed to catch sight of the truly 
great problems and question marks; moreover, their courage and eyes 
simply don't reach that far - and above all, the need that makes them 
scholars, their inner expectations and wish that things might be such and 
such, their fear and hope, too soon find rest and satisfaction. What 
makes, for instance, the pedantic Englishman Herbert Spencer48 rave in 
his own way and makes him draw a line of hope, a horizon which 
defines what is desirable; that definitive reconciliation of 'egoism and 
altruism' about which he spins fables - this almost nauseates the likes of 
us: a human race that adopts as its ultimate perspective such a 
Spencerian perspective would strike us as deserving of contempt, of 
annihilation! But that he had to view as his highest hope what to others 
counts and should count only as a disgusting possibility is a question 
mark that Spencer would have been unable to foresee. So, too, it is with 
the faith with which so many materialistic natural scientists rest 
content: the faith in a world that is supposed to have its equivalent and 
measure in human thought, in human valuations - a 'world of truth' 
that can be grasped entirely with the help of our four-cornered little 
human reason - What? Do we really want to demote existence in this 
way to an exercise in arithmetic and an indoor diversion for mathemati­
cians? Above all, one shouldn't want to strip it of its ambiguous 
character: that, gentlemen, is what good taste demands - above all, the 
taste of reverence for everything that lies beyond your horizon! That the 
only rightful interpretation of the world should be one to which you 
have a right; one by which one can do research and go on scientifically 
in your sense of the term (you really mean mechanistically?) - one that 
48 English social thinker (1820-1903) who combined evolutionary beliefs with a form of 
utilitarianism; he believed that human history would lead to an ideal state in which egoism and 
altruism were reconciled. 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
permits counting, calculating, weighing, seeing, grasping, and nothing 
else - that is a crudity and naivete, assuming it is not a mental illness, an 
idiocy. Would it not be quite probable, conversely, that precisely the 
most superficial and external aspect of existence - what is most 
apparent; its skin and its sensualization - would be grasped first and 
might even be the only thing that let itself be grasped? Thus, a 
'scientific' interpretation of the world, as you understand it, might still 
be one of the stupidestof all possible interpretations of the world, i.e. one 
of those most lacking in significance. This to the ear and conscience of 
Mr Mechanic, who nowadays likes to pass as a philosopher and insists 
that mechanics is the doctrine of the first and final laws on which 
existence may be built, as on a ground floor. But an essentially 
mechanistic world would be an essentially meaningless world! Suppose 
one judged the value of a piece of music according to how much of it 
could be counted, calculated, and expressed in formulas - how absurd 
such a 'scientific' evaluation of music would bel What would one have 
comprehended, understood, recognized? Nothing, really nothing of 
what is 'music' in it! 
374 
Our new 'infinite '. - How far the perspectival character of existence 
extends, or indeed whether it has any other character; whether an 
existence without interpretation, without 'sense', doesn't become 'non­
sense'; whether, on the other hand, all existence isn't essentially an 
interpreting existence - that cannot, as would be fair, be decided even by 
the most industrious and extremely conscientious analysis and self­
examination of the intellect; for in the course of this analysis, the human 
intellect cannot avoid seeing itself under its perspectival forms, and 
solely in these. We cannot look around our corner: it is a hopeless 
curiosity to want to know what other kinds of intellects and perspectives 
there might be; e.g. whether other beings might be able to experience 
time backwards, or alternately forwards and backwards (which would 
involve another direction of life and a different conception of cause and 
effect). But I think that today we are at least far away from the ridiculous 
immodesty of decreeing from our angle that perspectives are permitted 
only from this angle. Rather, the world has once again become infinite to 
us: insofar as we cannot reject the possibility that it includes infinite 
239 

The Cay Science 
interpretations. Once again the great shudder seizes us - but who again 
would want immediately to deify in the old manner this monster of an 
unknown world? And to worship from this time on the unknown (das 
Unbekannte) as 'the Unknown One' (den Unbekannten)? Aias, too many 
ungodly possibilities of interpretation are included in this unknown; too 
much devilry, stupidity, foolishness of interpretation - our own human, 
all too human one, even, which we know. . . 
375 
Why we seem to be Epicureans. - We are cautious, we modem men, about 
ultimate convictions; our mistrust lies in wait for the enchantments and 
deceptions of the conscience involved in every strong faith, every 
unconditional Yes and No. How can this be explained? Maybe what is to 
be found here is largely the caution of 'once bitten, twice shy'; of the 
disappointed idealist; but there is also another, superior component: the 
gleeful curiosity of the one who used to stand in the corner and was 
driven to despair by his corner and who now delights and luxuriates in 
the opposite of a corner, in the boundless, in 'the free as such'. Thus an 
almost Epicurean hent of knowledge develops that will not easily let go 
of the questionable character of things; also an aversion to hig moral 
words and gestures; a taste that rejects all crude, four-square oppositions 
and is proudly aware of its practice in entertaining doubts. For this 
constitutes our pride, this slight tightening of the reins as our urge for 
certainty races ahead, this self-control of the rider on his wildest rides -
for we still ride spirited and fiery animals; and when we hesitate, it is 
<langer least of all that makes us hesitate. 
Our slow periods. - This is how all artists and people of 'works' feel, the 
motherly type: at every chapter of their lives - which is always marked 
by a work - they always think they've reached their goal; they would 
always patiently take death with the feeling 'we are ripe for it'. This is 
not the expression of weariness - rather that of a certain autumnal 
sunniness and mildness that the work itself, the faet that the work has 
become ripe, always leaves behind in its creator. Then the pace of life 
240 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
slows down and becomes thick and flows like honey - to the point of a 
longfermata, 49 of the faith in the longfermata. 
377 
We who are homeless. - Among Europeans today there is no lack of those 
who have a right to call themselves homeless in a distinctive and 
honourable sense: it is to them in particular that I commend my secret 
wisdom and gaya scienza. so For their lot is hard; their hope uncertain; it 
is a feat to invent a form of comfort for them - but to what avail! We 
children of the future - how could we be at home in this today! We are 
unfavourably disposed towards all ideals that might make one feel at 
home in this fragile, broken time of transition; as for its 'realities', we 
don't believe they are lasting. The ice that still supports people today 
has already grown very thin; the wind that brings a thaw is blowing; we 
ourselves, we homeless ones, are something that breaks up the ice and 
other all too thin 'realities' ... We 'conserve' nothing; neither do we 
want to return to any past; we are by no means 'liberal'; we are not 
working for 'progress'; we don't need to plug our ears to the market­
place's sirens of the future: what they sing - 'equal rights', 'free society', 
'no more masters and no servants' - has no allure for us. We hold it 
absolutely undesirable that a realm of justice and concord should be 
established on earth (because it would certainly be the realm of the most 
profound levelling down to mediocrity and chinoiserie);51 we are de­
lighted by all who love, as we do, <langer, war, and adventure; who refuse 
to compromise, to be captured, to reconcile, to be castrated; we consider 
ourselves conquerors; we contemplate the necessity for new orders as 
well as for a new slavery - for every strengthening and enhancement of 
the human type also involves a new kind of enslavement - doesn't it? 
With all this, can we really be at home in an age that loves to claim the 
distinction of being the most humane, the mildest, and most righteous 
age the sun has ever seen? It is bad enough that precisely when we hear 
these beautiful words, we have the ugliest misgivings. What we find in 
49 Musical sign indicating that a note or pause may be held for longer than its value would usually 
prescribe 
so See above, footnote to p. r. 
51 European decorative style so called because it is intended to look Chinese. Because of the slight 
artistic value of much that was produced in this style it has the connotation of insignificant, 
insubstantial, vapid, frivolous. 

The Cay Science 
them is merely an expression - and the masquerade - of a deep 
weakening, of weariness, of old age, of declining energies! What can it 
matter to us what sequins the sick may use to cover up their weakness? 
Let them parade it as their virtue; after all, there is no doubt that 
weakness makes us mild, so righteous, so inoffensive, so 'humane'! The 
'religion of compassion' to which one would like to convert us - oh, we 
know these hysterical little men and women well enough who today 
need just this religion as a veil and finery. We are no humanitarians; we 
should never dare to allow ourselves to speak of 'our love of humanity' -
our type is not actor enough for that! Or not Saint-Simonist 52 enough; 
not French enough. One really has to be afflicted with a Gallic excess of 
erotic irritability and enamoured impatience to approach humanity 
honestly with one's lust ... Humanity! Has there ever been a more 
hideous old woman amongst all old women? (Unless it were 'the truth': 
a question for philosophers.) No, we do not love humanity; but on the 
other hand we are not nearly 'German' enough, in the sense in which 
the word 'German' is constantly used nowadays, to advocate nationalism 
and racial hatred and to be able to take pleasure in the national scabies 
of the heart and blood poisoning with which European peoples nowa­
days delimit and barricade themselves against each other as if with 
quarantines. For that, we are too uninhibited, too malicious, too spoiled, 
also too well-informed, too 'well-travelled': we far prefer to live on 
mountains, apart, 'untimely', in past or future centuries, merely in 
order to avoid the silent rage to which we know we should be 
condemned as eyewitnesses of politics that are destroying the German 
spirit by making it vain and which are, moreover, petty politics - to keep 
its creation from falling apart again, doesn't it need to plant it between 
two deadly hatreds? Mustn 't it desire the eternalization of the European 
system of many petty states? We who are homeless are too diverse and 
racially mixed in our descent, as 'modern men', and consequently we 
are not inclined to participate in the mendacious racial self-admiration 
and obscenity that parades in Germany today as a sign of a German way 
of thinking and that is doubly false and indecent among the people of 
the 'historical sense'. In a word - and let this be our word of honour -
we are good Europeans, the rich heirs of millennia of European spirit, 
with too many provisions but also too many obligations. As such, we 
52 Referring to Claude-Henri Saint-Simon ( 1760- 182 5), a French utopian socialist 
242 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
have also outgrown Christianity and are averse to it - precisely because 
we have grown out of it, because our ancestors were Christians who in 
their Christianity were mercilessly upright: for their faith they willingly 
sacrificed possessions, blood, position, and fatherland. We - do the 
same. But for what? For our unbelief? For every kind of unbelief? No, 
you know better than that, my friends! The hidden Yes in you is 
stronger than all Nos and Maybes that afflict you and your age like a 
disease; and you must sail the seas, you emigrants, you too are compelled 
to this by- afaith! 
'And become bright again '. - We who are generous and rich in spirit, who 
stand by the road like open wells with no intention to fend off anyone 
who feels like drawing from us - we unfortunately do not know how to 
defend ourselves where we want to: we have no way of preventing 
people from clouding us, from darkening us; the time in which we live 
throws into us what is most time-bound; its dirty hirds drop their filth 
into us; its boys their knick-knacks; and exhausted wanderers who come 
to us to rest, their small and great miseries. But we will do what we have 
always done: we take down into our depths whatever one casts into us -
for we are deep; we do not forget - and become bright again. . . 
379 
The fool's interlude. - The writer of this book is no misanthrope; today 
one pays too dearly for hatred of man. In order to hate the way one 
formerly hated the human being, Timonically, 53 wholly, without excep­
tion, with one's whole heart, with the whole love of hatred, one would 
have to renounce contempt. And how much fine joy, how much 
patience, how much graciousness even do we owe precisely to our 
contempt! Moreover, it makes us 'God's elect': refined contempt is our 
taste and privilege, our art, our virtue perhaps, and we are the most 
modem of modems. . .Hatred, in contrast, places people on a par, vis­
a-vis; in hatred there is honour; finally, in hatred there is fear, an ample 
53 Legendary Athenian misanthrope, who is the subject of Shakespeare's Timon of Athens 
243 

The Cay Science 
good piece of f ear. We fearless ones, however, we more spiritual men of 
this age, we know our advantage well enough to live without fear of this 
age precisely because we are more spiritual. We will hardly be decapi­
tated, imprisoned, or exiled; not even our books will be banned or 
burned. The age loves the spirit; it loves and needs us, even if we should 
have to make clear to it that we are artists of contempt; that every 
association with human beings makes us shudder slightly; that for all 
our mildness, patience, congeniality, and politeness, we cannot persuade 
our noses to give up their prejudices against the proximity of a human 
being; that we love nature the less humanly it behaves, and art if it is the 
artist's escape from man or the artist's mockery of man, or the artist's 
mockery of himself. . . 
'The wanderer' speaks. - In order to see our European morality for once 
as it looks from a distance, and to measure it up against other past or 
future moralities, one has to proceed like a wanderer who wants to know 
how high the towers in a town are: he leaves the town. 'Thoughts about 
moral prejudices', if they are not to be prejudices about prejudices, 
presuppose a position outside morality, some point beyond good and evil 
to which one has to rise, climb, or fly - and in the present case, at least a 
point beyond our good and evil, a freedom from everything 'European', 
by which I mean the sum of commanding value judgements that have 
become part of our flesh and blood. That one wants to go precisely out 
there, up there, may be a slight rashness, a peculiar and unreasonable 
'you must' - for we seekers of knowledge also have our idiosyncrasies of 
'unfree will' - the question is whether one really can get up there. This 
may depend on manifold conditions. Mainly, the question is how light 
or heavy we are - the problem of our 'specific gravity'. One has to be 
very light to drive one's will to knowledge into such a distance and, as it 
were, beyond one's time; to create for oneself eyes to survey millennia 
and, moreover, clear skies in these eyes. One must have liberated oneself 
from many things that oppress, inhibit, hold down, and make heavy 
precisely us Europeans today. The human being of such a beyond who 
wants to catch a glimpse of the highest measures of value of his time 
must first of all 'overcome' this time in himself - this is the test of his 
strength - and consequently not only his time but also his aversion and 
244 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
opposition against this time, his suffering from this time, his untimeli­
ness, his romanticism. 
On the question of being understandable. - One does not only wish to be 
understood when one writes; one wishes just as surely not to be under­
stood. It is by no means necessarily an objection to a hook when anyone 
finds it incomprehensible: perhaps that was part of the author's inten­
tion - he didn't want to be understood by just 'anybody'. Every nobler 
spirit and taste selects his audience when he wants to communicate; in 
selecting it, he simultaneously erects barriers against 'the others'. All 
subtler laws of a style originated therein: they simultaneously keep away, 
create a distance, forbid 'entrance', understanding, as said above - while 
they open the ears of those whose ears are related to ours. And let me 
say this amongst ourselves and about my own case: I want neither the 
inexperience nor the liveliness of my temperament to keep me from 
being understandable to you, my friends - not the liveliness, as much as 
it forces me to deal with a matter swiftly in order to deal with it at all. 
For I approach deep problems such as I do cold baths: fast in, fast out. 
That this is no way to get to the depths, to get deep enough, is the 
superstition of those who fear water, the enemies of cold water; they 
speak without experience. Oh, the great cold makes one fast! And 
incidentally: does a matter stay unrecognized, not understood, merely 
because it has been touched in flight; is only glanced at, seen in a flash? 
Does one absolutely have to sit firmly on it first? Have brooded on it as 
on an egg? Diu noctuque incubando,54 as Newton said of himself? At least 
there are truths that are especially shy and ticklish and can't be caught 
except suddenly - that one must surprise or leave alone. Finally, my 
brevity has yet another value: given the questions that occupy me, I 
must say many things briefly so that they will be heard even more 
briefly. For, as an immoralist, one needs to avoid corrupting innocents -
I mean, asses and old maids of both sexes to whom life offers nothing 
but their innocence; even more, my writing should inspire, elevate, and 
encourage them to be virtuous. I can't imagine a funnier sight on earth 
than inspired old asses and maids who get aroused by the sweet 
54 'sitting upon it day and night' 
245 

The Cay Science 
sentiments of virtue: and 'this I have seen' - thus spoke Zarathustra. 
Enough about brevity; things stand worse with my ignorance, which I 
don't try to hide from myself. There are hours when I am ashamed of it 
- to be sure, also hours when I am ashamed of this shame. Maybe we 
philosophers are all in a bad position regarding knowledge these days: 
science is growing, and the most scholarly of us are close to discovering 
that they know too little. But it would be even worse if things were 
different - if we knew too much; our task is and remains above all not to 
mistake ourselves for someone else. We are different from scholars, 
although we are inevitably also, among other things, scholarly. We have 
different needs, grow differently; have a different digestion: we need 
more; we also need less. There is no formula for how much a spirit 
needs for its nourishment; but if it has a taste for independence, for 
quick coming and going, for wandering, perhaps for adventures of 
which only the swiftest are capable, it would rather live free with little 
food than unfree and stuff ed. It is not fat but the greatest possible 
suppleness and strength that a good <lancer wants from his nourishment 
- and I wouldn't know what the spirit of a philosopher might more want 
to be than a good <lancer. For the dance is his ideal, also his art, and 
finally also his only piety, his 'service of God'. 
The great health. - We who are new, nameless, hard to understand; we 
premature births of an as yet unproved future - for a new end, we also 
need a new means, namely, a new health that is stronger, craftier, 
tougher, holder, and more cheerful than any previous health. Anyone 
whose soul thirsts to experience the whole range of previous values and 
aspirations, to sail around all the coasts of this 'inland sea' (Mittelmeer) 
of ideals, anyone who wants to know from the adventures of his own 
experience how it feels to be the discoverer or conqueror of an ideal, or 
to be an artist, a saint, a lawmaker, a sage, a pious man, a soothsayer, an 
old-style divine Ioner - any such person needs one thing above all - the 
great health, a health that one doesn't only have, but also acquires 
continually and must acquire because one gives it up again and again, 
and must give it up!. .. And now, after being on our way in this manner 
for a long time, we argonauts of the ideal - braver, perhaps, than is 
prudent and often suffering shipwreck and damage but, to repeat, 

Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
healthier than one would like to admit, dangerously healthy; ever again 
healthy - it seems to us as if, in reward, we face an as yet undiscovered 
land the boundaries of which no one has yet surveyed, beyond all the 
lands and corners of the ideal heretofore, a world so over-rich in what is 
beautiful, strange, questionable, terrible, and divine that our curiosity 
and our thirst to possess it have veered beyond control - alas, so that 
nothing will sate us anymore! After such vistas and with such a burning 
hunger in our conscience and science, how could we still be satisfied 
with modern-day man? Too bad - but it's inevitable that we look at his 
worthiest goals and hopes with a seriousness which is difficult to 
maintain; maybe we don't even look at all any more. Another ideal runs 
before us, a peculiar, seductive, dangerous ideal to which we wouldn't 
want to persuade anyone, since we don't readily concede the right to it to 
anyone: the ideal of a spirit that plays naively, i.e. not deliberately but 
from overflowing abundance and power, with everything that was 
hitherto called holy, good, untouchable, divine; a spirit which has gone 
so far that the highest thing which the common people quite under­
standably accepts as its measure of value would signify for it <langer, 
decay, debasement, or at any rate recreation, blindness, temporary self­
oblivion: the ideal of a human, superhuman well-being and benevolence 
that will often enough appear inhuman - for example, when it places 
itself next to all earthly seriousness heretofore, all forms of solemnity in 
gesture, word, tone, look, morality, and task as if it were their most 
incarnate and involuntary parody - and in spite of all this, it is perhaps 
only with it that the great seriousness really emerges; that the real 
question mark is posed for the first time; that the destiny of the soul 
changes; the hand of the clock moves forward; the tragedy begins. 
Epilogue. - But as I finally slowly, slowly paint this gloomy question 
mark and am still willing to remind my readers of the virtues of reading 
in the right way - oh, what forgotten and unknown virtues! - it strikes 
me that I hear all around myself most malicious, cheerful, hobgoblin­
like laughter: the spirits of my hook are themselves descending upon 
me, pulling my ears and calling me to order. 'We can't stand it 
anymore', they shout, 'stop, stop this raven-black music! Are we not 
surrounded by bright mid-morning? And by soft ground and green 
247 

The Cay Science 
grass, the kingdom of the dance? Was there ever a better hour for 
gaiety? Who will sing us a song, a morning song, so sunny, so light, so 
full-fledged that it does not chase away the crickets55 but instead invites 
them to join in the singing and dancing? And even plain, rustic bagpipes 
would be better than the mysterious sounds, such bog-cries, voices from 
the crypt, and marmot whistles with which you have so far regaled us in 
your wilderness, my Mr. Hermit and Musician of the Future! 56 No! 
Not such sounds! Let us rather strike up more pleasant, more joyous 
tones!' 57 Does it please you now, my impatient friends? Well then, who 
wouldn't like to please you? My bagpipes are already waiting; my throat, 
too - it may sound a bit rough, but put up with it; after all, we're in the 
mountains. At least what you are about to hear is new; and if you don't 
understand it, if you misunderstand the singer, what does it matter? 
This happens to be 'the singer's curse'. 58 You will be able to hear his 
music and tune so much the better, and so much the better will you be 
able to dance to his pipe. Is that what you want? 
55 Grille means both 'cricket' and 'bad mood'. 
56 Wagner referred to his own music as 'the music of the future'. 
57 from Schiller's Ode to Joy, used in the choral conclusion to the fourth movement ofBeethoven's 
Ninth Symphony 
58 Title of a ballad by Ludwig Uhland (1787- 1862) 

Appendix: Sangs of Prince Vogelfrei 
To Goethe1 
The ever-enduring 
is merely your parable! 
God the all-blurring 
your fiction unbearable. 
World-wheel, the turning one 
spawns goals each day: 
Fate - sighs the yearning one, 
the fool calls it- play. 
World-play, the ruling one, 
blends truth and tricks: -
The eternally fooling one 
blends us - in the mix!. .. 
Voge/frei is an archaic expression used to declare someone an outlaw, literally 'free as a bird', and 
therefore not to be sheltered. In German the vand[ are both pronounced as!, adding alliteration 
to this name and the tide Nietzsche makes of it. 'Prince Vogelfrei' here functions as Nietzsche's 
nom de guerre or pseudonym. 
1 Nietzsche is here parodying the 'Chorus Mysticus' which concludes Goethe's Faust. At issue are 
the poet's need to fictionalize, and Goethe's elevation of womanhood to a metaphysical 'eternal 
feminine'. In Faust, the 'eternal feminine' (das Ewig-Weibliche) represented by the blessed 
Gretchen succeeds in helping to redeem Faust, and to pull him up into heaven: 'Woman 
Eternal I Draws us on high' ('Das Ewig-Weibliche I Zieht uns hinan') (lines 12110-12u1 of 
Faust). 
249 

The Cay Science 
Poet 's Calling 
Stopped to rest one day, while walking, 
seated under shady trees, 
when I heard a ticking tocking 
dainty rhythm on the breeze. 
I grew angry - made some faces -
but I lost my anger quick 
and, as if in poet's paces, 
started speaking tick tock tick. 
As I sat, my verses making, 
syllables and sounds did pour, 
till I burst out laughing, shaking 
for a quarter hour or more. 
You a poet? You a poet? 
Is your mind no longer good? 
'Yes, my man, you are a poet' 
shrugs the pecker in the wood. 
Whom do I await in bushes? 
Whom do I, a robber, stalk? 
Proverb? Image? My rhyme rushes 
after it and makes it talk. 
Anything that moves, you know it 
serves to fuel my poet's mood. 
'Yes, my man, you are a poet' 
shrugs the pecker in the wood. 
Rhymes, I think, must be like arrows: 
when they pierce the lizard's heart, 
how he twitches, how it harrows, 
how he leaps in fits and starts! 
Wretched creatures, full of woe, it 
kills you or it boils your blood! 
'Yes, my man, you are a poet' 
shrugs the pecker in the wood. 
Crooked proverbs full ofhurry, 
drunken wordlets how you throng! 
See each word and sentence scurry 
to the tick tock chain so long. 
Worthless souls who can't forgo it 

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei 
find it fun? Are poets crude? 
'Yes, my man, you are a poet' 
shrugs the pecker in the wood. 
Do you mock me feathered joker? 
Mentally I'm in rough shape, 
might my feelings too be broken? 
Fear my rage you jackanapes! 
Still, the poet rhymes - and though it 
spoiled his mood 'twas all he could. 
'Yes, my man, you are a poet' 
shrugs the pecker in the wood. 
In the South 
I perch now midst the crooked arbour 
and leave my weariness to sway. 
A bird enticed me to this harbour, 
within this nest I cool my ardour. 
Yet where am I? Away! Away! 
The sleeping sea, its colour fleeting, 
a purple sail, pure indolence. 
Rocks, fig trees, spires and harbour meeting, 
around me idylls, sheep are bleating -
absorb me, southern innocence! 
Just step by step - that is not living, 
the German stride's too dull for me. 
I asked the wind to lift me heaving, 
with birds I soared without misgiving, -
and south I flew across the sea. 
Reason! A grim preoccupation, 
too soon it brings us all the way! 
In flight I saw my !imitation, -
now juices flow for new creation, 
for life renewed and dawn of play ... 
It's wise to think in solitary, 
but sing alone? - There wisdom ends! 
I've come to sing your praises merry, 
be still, sit down, and with me tarry 
my little birds, my naughty friends! 

The Cay Science 
So young so false and so beguiling, 
it seems love looks upon me smiling 
and offers ev'ry charm of youth? 
Up north - I say it though I waver -
I loved a crone so old I quaver: 
this woman bore the name of 'truth' ... 
Pious Beppa 
As long as I'm curvaceous, 
being pious is no test. 
To young girls God is gracious, 
he loves the cute ones best. 
He will forgive the friar, 
forgive him certainly 
that he, like other friars, 
so wants to be with me. 
He is no grey church father! 
No, young and full of sap, 
hung over he'll still bother 
to play the jealous chap. 
I do not love the ageing, 
he does not love the old: 
How wondrous and engaging 
when God's designs unfold! 
The Church, it knows ofliving, 
it checks us thoroughly. 
And always it's forgiving -
who would not pardon mel 
One whispers low and steady, 
one kneels and wipes at tears, 
and when the new sin's ready 
the old one disappears. 
Praise God who loves a maiden 
as pretty as she lives, 
his heart by sin is laden, 
which he himself forgives. 
As long as I'm curvaceous, 
being pious is no test: 

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei 
When old and unsalacious, 
the devil take the rest! 
The Mysterious Bark 2 
Yesternight, all were asleep, 
how the wind with steps uncertain 
sighing through the streets did creep. 
Rest was not in pillow, curtain, 
poppy, slumber potion deep, 
nor good conscience - which unburdens. 
Finally I left my bed, 
dressed and ran down to the shoreline. 
Tender mild the night - I met 
man and bark on sand in moonshine, 
sleepy both, the man and pet: -
Sleepily the bark took to the brine. 
Just one hour, more than one, 
or was it a year? - my thinking 
and all feeling left me, sinking 
down to timeJess tedium. 
Chasms opened, I stood shrinking, 
bounds dissolved: - then it was done! 
- Morning came: On blackness seeping 
rests a bark, it rides the swell ... 
What took place? Thus crying, weeping 
hundreds ask: what was this? Heil? - -
Nothing happened! We were sleeping, 
sleeping all - so well, so well. 
Declaration of Love ( whereby however the poet felt into a ditch) 
Oh wonder! Does he fly? 
He climbs aloft, and yet his pinions rest? 
What lifts and bears him high? 
What are his goal and course and limit's test? 
2 Cf. Nietzsche's dithyramb 'The Sun Sets' ('Die Sonne sinkt') for the motif of the mysterious 
bark or skiff. 
253 

The Cay Science 
Star and eternity, 
he lives now in the heights that living shuns, 
forgives all jealousy - : 
Who see him fly, they too are soaring ones! 
Oh albatross! I know 
that to the heights I am forever lured. 
I thought of you: tears flow 
and do not cease - I love you noble hird! 
Song of a Theocritical Goatherd 3 
I lie here, stomach aching, 
with bed bugs in my pants. 
Close by, the noise they're making! 
I hear it, how they dance ... 
She was supposed to slip away 
and join me as my lover. 
I wait here like a stray -
there's no sign ofher. 
She promised she would come, 
how could she be untrue? 
- Does she chase everyone 
like my old goats do? 
That silken dress, pray tell! 
Proud gir!, have you been good? 
Does more than one buck dwell 
in this little wood? 
- Lethally love makes us wait, 
it bums, it hardens! 
As hot nights germinate 
toadstools in gardens. 
Love eats away at me 
like seven deadly sins -
1'11 never eat again. 
Farewell, dear onions! 
3 The Greek poet Theocritus (third century BC) is considered the father of pastoral poetry. A 
'theocritical' goatherd, using word play, is thus both pastoral and critical of God (theo ). This 
poem, with its terse irony and irregular meter, reminds one of the lyrics of Heinrich Heine, 
Nietzsche's favourite lyric poet. 
254 

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei 
The moon sets in the sea, 
and stars fade from the sky. 
Grey dawn comes 'round for me -
I just want to die. 
'These Vacillating People' 
People who are vacillating 
make my anger flame. 
When they honour they are hating, 
all their praise is self-contempt and shame. 
I'm not bound by their convention 
as I wander free, 
in their gaze is apprehension, 
poison-laced their hopeless jealousy. 
May they curse me all to blazes, 
spit for all to see! 
Though they seek with helpless gazes, 
none will ever find their mark in me. 
Pool in Despair4 
Oh! What I wrote on board and wall 
with foolish heart and foolish scrawl, 
was meant to help me decorate ... 
But you say: 'Foolish hands desecrate -
and we the walls must expurgate, 
remove all traces big and small!' 
Allow me! This I can enjoy -
I've wielded sponge and broom for all 
as critic and as water boy. 
But, when I've finished your employ, 
I ask you, you of super wit, 
your wisdom on the walls to sh-. 
4 'Narrenhande beschmieren Tisch und Wande', literally 'a fool's hands smear table and walls', is a 
German proverb to the effect that clumsy people make a mess. 
255 

The Cay Science 
Rimus remedium, or: How sick poets console themselves5 
Time is dour, 
a witch who drools incessantly, 
drips hour upon hour. 
In vain, disgust cries out of me: 
'Curse, curse the power 
of eternity!' 
World - brazen hard: 
A glowing bull - it hears no moan. 
Pain shoots through me and bores like a dart 
into my bone: 
'World has no heart, 
and stupid he, who'd therefore groan!' 
Your poppies pour, 
pour, fever! poison in my brain! 
Too long already you bring me pain. 
What would you ask? What? 'For what reward?' 
- - Ha! Curse the whore 
And her disdain! 
No! Please don't go! 
Outside it's cold, I hear it raining -
1'11 cherish you without complaining. 
- Here! Take my gold: it glitters so! -
'Happiness' - No? 
Fever is sustaining? -
The door panes fly! 
Rain lashes in, to my bed it climbs! 
The lamp blows out - havoc is nigh! 
- Who did not own a hundred rhymes, 
betimes, betimes, 
Would surely die! 
5 Latin for 'rhyme as remedy'. Compare the dithyramb 'Ariadne's Lament' from Nietzsche's 
collection of poems entitled Dionysus Dithyrambs. In Zarathustra, the poem is featured in Part IV 
as the song of the magician. Ariadne, lover of Theseus, is abandoned by the Greek hero, even 
though she rescued him from the labyrinth of the Minotaur by weaving a thread for him to 
follow. The 'glowing bull' refers to Phalaris of Agrigentum (570-554 ec), a tyrant who tortured 
his enemies by roasting them alive in a brazen bull. 

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei 
'My Happiness!'6 
I see again the pigeons of San Marco: 
The square is still, all bathed in sunny leisure. 
In gentle morn I idly let my songs flow 
like swarms of pigeons high into the azure -
And still caress 
Them, tucking one more rhyme into their feathers 
- my happiness! 
You silent, blue-lit, silky heaven's awning, 
protectively above the coloured stone 
I love, and fear, and envy - you are yawning ... 
lndeed I'd drink its soul into my own! 
Would I let it egress? -
No, silence, feast for eyes, in splendour dawning! 
- my happiness! 
You tower stem, with lion force ascending 
triumphantly, no effort, in full view! 
Across the square your throaty peal suspending - : 
In French you'd be its own accent aigu? 
To stay would be duress 
like yours, a bond of silken strands unending ... 
- my happiness! 
Go, music, go! Let shadows start preparing 
to grow into the brown and balmy night! 
Too early in the day for chimes, the flaring 
of gilded trim awaits a rosy light, 
Much does the day compress, 
much time for verses, prowling, secret sharing 
- my happiness! 
6 The refrain of this poem, 'mein Gliick! Mein Gliick!' is an emphatic statement of the kind of 
happiness ( G/iick) Nietzsche enjoys, though in order to preserve the four beats I use 'my 
happiness' only once. 
257 

The Cay Science 
Toward New Seas7 
Out there - thus I will; so doing 
trust myself now and my grip. 
Open lies the sea, its blueing 
swallows my Genoese ship. 
All things now are new and beaming, 
space and time their noon decree - : 
Only your eye - monstrous, gleaming 
stares at me, infinity! 
Sils-Maria 8 
There sat I, waiting, waiting, - yet for naught, 
transcending good and evil, sometimes caught 
in light, sometimes caught in shadow, all game, 
all sea, all midday, all time without aim. 
At once then, my friend! One turned into Two -
- and Zarathustra strode into my view ... 
To the Mistral. A Dance Song 9 
Mistral wind, you rain-cloud reaper, 
sadness slayer, heaven sweeper 
blustering, how I love you! 
Are we not of one womb's making, 
first bom of one fate unbreaking, 
predetermined just we two? 
Here on stony pathways sliding 
I run to you dancing, gliding, 
dancing as you pipe and sing: 
You without a ship and rudder, 
you as freedom's freest brother, 
over raging seas do spring. 
7 Nietzsche frequently used the figure of Columbus and the metaphor of seafaring to symbolize the 
courage of the human spirit. In The Cay Science§ 289 he reminds us that the moral earth, too, is 
round, as an exhortation to explore the realm of morals just as earlier explorers had ventured 
around the globe. A draft of this poem was titled 'To L.' (Lou von Salome). 
8 Sils Maria is a town in south-eastern Switzerland, in the Engadine valley, where Nietzsche spent 
his summers. 
9 The mistral wind of southern France is a strong north wind. 
258 

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei 
Scarce awake, I heard you calling, 
rushed to where the cliffs are falling 
golden walled into the sea. 
Hail! You came like rapids teeming, 
glitter bright and diamond gleaming 
from the peaks triumphantly. 
'Cross the plains of heaven dashing 
I saw horses, hooves a-flashing, 
saw the carriage where you stand, 
saw your hand and how it quivered 
when it to the steeds delivered 
lightning-like the whip's command, -
Saw you toss the reins and plummet 
faster from your airy summit, 
diving like an arrow bright, 
glowing as the distance closes, 
like a ray of gold on roses 
struck by daybreak's early light. 
On a thousand backs we're dancing, 
billow-backs and backs of chancing -
hail to dances new, I say! 
Let us dance in every manner, 
free - so shall be our art's banner, 
And our science - shall be gay! 
From each flower let us garner 
just one blossom for our honour, 
for our wreath just two leaves worth! 
Then like troubadours in riches 
we shall dance 'tween saints and bitches, 
dance our dance 'tween God and Earth! 
He who cannot dance with twisters, 
bandages his wounds and blisters, 
bound and old and paralysed; 
he who reeks of sanctimony, 
honour-fools and virtues phony, 
out of our paradise! 
Let us whirl the dust in dases 
into sickly people's noses, 
259 

The Cay Science 
let us shoo these sickly flies! 
This whole coast we must unshackle 
from their shrivel-breasted cackle, 
from these courage-vacant eyes! 
Let us chase the overcasters, 
world maligners, rain-cloud pastors, 
let us tear the dark sky's veil! 
Let us roar ... Free spirits' spirit, 
joy uplifts me when you're near, it 
makes me bluster like a gale! -
- And to mark this joy forever, 
leave a will that time can't sever, 
take this wreath up where you are! 
Huri it higher, further, madder, 
storm the sky on heaven's !adder, 
Hang it there - upon a star! 
260 

Index 
When an entry refers to a page on which more than one numbered section of the text appears, the section 
in question is indicated by an italicised numeral in parentheses. 
actions 151 (264), 173 (304) 
actors 
as masters 216-17 
musicians and 232-3 
on the problem of 225-6 (361) 
add-on-liars, the 51 (29) 
Aeschylus 29 
aesthetics 182, 235-6 
agreement, law of xx, 77 (76) 
air, our 166-7 (293) 
Ajax 125 
Alcaeus 83 
alcohol 58, 124, 129 
Alfieri, Vittorio, conte di 89 
Algiers 174 
Allah 122 
altruism 
and egoism 238 
no II6 (II9) 
Utility of 45 
amazement, our 59-60 (46) 
Americans 183,216 
amor fati I 57 
analogy xxi 
anarchists 235 
ancients 
and the art ofreading well xx, 247-8 
belief in dreams 132 
Andreas-Salome, Lou xxiv 
animals 
criticism by 145 (224) 
female and male 75-6 
with good conscience 77-8 (77) 
mercy to 97 
new domestic 177 (314) 
suffering from climate 178 
anthropomorphism 109-10 
antipathy 144 (218) 
antiquity 
essence of 227 
great men of 117 
science and virtue 119 
aphorisms vii- xi 
Apollo 85 
appearance 69-70, 104, 231 
avoiding deception by 143 
the consciousness of 63-4 (s4) 
Greeks' worship ofxii, 8-9 
and the problem ofthe actor 225-6 
and 'thing in itself' 214 
applause 141 (201), 184-5 (330) 
Archilochus of Paros 83 
architects 216 
architecture 
ofGenoa 164-5 
for those who wish to pursue knowledge 
159-60 (280) 
aristocracy see nobility 
Ariston of Chios u6 
Aristotle 76, 80 
Armida 175 
Arouet, Fran~ois Marie see Voltaire 
arrogance, against 15 
261 
art 
after illness 7-9 
and happiness 86, 88 
and life 170 
monologue 231-2 

art (cont.) 
and nature 79-81 (80) 
our ultimate gratitude to 104-5 (107) 
and practical wisdom 114 
romanticism in 234-6 
and truth xix 
artistic, the, in Europe 215- 17 (356) 
artists 
bad conscience of 231 
cheerfulness for 8-9 
coexistence 233-4 
concept of, and the problem of the actor 
225-6 
of contempt ix, 243-4 (379) 
Germans as 103 (ms) 
glorify by choice 86, 148 
in love 69, 70- 1 
love ofwork 57, 75 
offensive in the presentation 139 
philosophy of 97 
slow periods 240- 1 
as squanderers 141,212 
on the vanity of 87-8 (87) 
viewpoint 231-2 
we 70-1 (59) 
what one should learn from 169-70 (299) 
and works 147 (241) 
artworks 
and the art of festivals 89 
the first distinction to draw regarding 231-2 
(367) 
asceticism xviii, 38, 123 
Asclepius 194 
Asians 58 
aside 136 (174) 
Assua sect 17 4 
atavism 36 (rn) 
atheism, triumph of scientific 218-19 
audience, selection of 245-6 
Augier, Emile 46n 
Augustine, St 224 
Augustus, Emperor 54 
autobiography, warning against 89 (91) 
backward inference 235 
bad, whom do you call? 152 (273) 
Bahnsen 220 
Balsamo, Giuseppe see Cagliostro, Alessandro, 
conte di 
barbarians, vs. higher culture 94- 5, roo- 1 
battles, new 109 (rn8), 112 
Batz, Phillip ('Mainlander') 220n 
Baubo 8 
beautiful, the and the good 86 (85) 
Index 
beauty 193 
Beethoven, Ludwig van roo 
beggars, and courtesy 141 (204) 
being 218 
or becoming 235-6 
beliefs, and motives 58-9 
believers 
and their need to believed 205-6 (347) 
see also faith 
Bellini, Vincenzo 77 
Benares 122 
benevolence 116 (118) 
Beroaldus II 8 
best of all possible worlds xiv 
beware, let us 109- ro ( 109) 
Beyle, Marie Henri see Stendhal 
Bible 205 
Bismarck, Otto Eduard Leopold, Fiirst von rn3n, 
217 
Blas, Gil 78, 226 
blindness, delight in 162 (287) 
body 
distress of the 60- 1 
healths ofthe I16-17 
philosophy as a misunderstanding of the 5-6 
books 99- roo, 148 (248) 
faced with scholarly 230- 1 (366) 
lights and shadows in 89 (90) 
boredorn, and work 57-8 (42), 64 
brief habits 167-8 (295) 
Brutus 93-4 
Buddha xii, 109 (rn8), 127, 204,211 
Buddhism 97, 122, 206 
the spread of 124 
Burckhardt, Jacob viii 
Caesar (Gaius Julius Caesar) 48, 94 
Cagliostro, Alessandro, conte di 96 
Callimachus 83 
'cannibalism' 135 
careful, better be 140 (197) 
Carlyle, Thomas 93 
categorical imperative 33, 188 
categories 207,237 
Cato 58 
causality 218 
cause and effect 113(112), 121, 142, 144 (217) 
causes, two kinds often confused 255 (360) 
cautions 89 (91), 180 (321) 
Cerberus 14 7 
certainty 
of death 158 
desire for 30, 205-6 
Chamfort, Sebastien Roch Nicolas viii, 91 -2 (95) 
262 

chance 158 
those who deny 150 (258) 
chanceries, and German language 1 o 1 -3 
change, the greatest 131-2 (!52) 
changeableness 59-60 
chaos 109, 180 
character 1 68 
giving style to one's 163-4 
and role 215 
and spirit 146 (235) 
chastity, female 74-5 (71) 
chauvinisme 205 
cheerfulness 8-9, 63, 161 
how to understand our 199 (343) 
of madness 77 
child, killing a 76 (73) 
children, women's need for 75 
China 49 
Chinese 7 4, 129 
chinoiserie 241 
chosen people, the 125-6 (136) 
Christ,Jesus 127, 2II 
error of 126 (138) 
possibility of 126 
Christianity xiii, xviii, 97,201,204,206 
against 123 (132), 218-20, 243 
critique of 127 
a dangerous decision 123 (130) 
decline of 221 
andinventionofsin 124-5, 126 
moral scepticism in II7-18 (122) 
and morality xiii-xiv, 219-20 
as narcotics of Europe 129 
need for 20 5-6 
and the passions 126 
as 'romantic' 235 
and suicide 123 (131) 
woman spoiled by 227 
church 120, 222, 252 
vs. state 223 
cities 159, 164-5 
classification 207 
climate xi, 142, 178 
coexistence, our 2 3 3 -4 ( 369) 
Colli, Giorgio xxvii 
comedy 29, 73, 87, 132 
of the famous 52 (30) 
common, and noble 30-2 (3) 
communication, need for, and strength of 
consciousness 212-14 
communities, individuals, and the herd instinct 
114- 15 
company, always in our 135 (166) 
compassion 40, 95, 96, II6, 137 (IJ6), 152 
Index 
and morality 203 
and 'religion' of 191-2, 242 
those who feel, and the will to suffer 191-2 
(338) 
as the virtue of prostitutes 39 
compromise, refusal of241-3 
concepts 
falsification of reality by using xx- xxi, 113 
species 218 
Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de 234 
confession 222 
conscience 175 
animal with a good 77-8 (77) 
bad 139 (186) 
deceptions of the 240 
and herd instinct II5 (n7), 131 
intellectual xvii, 29-30 (2), 95, 179-80, (JI9), 
187-9, 200-1 (344) 
and judgement 187-9 
paganism with a good 217 
and the power of contradiction 169 
refinement of the Christian 219 
and unyieldingness 133 
what does it say? 152 (270) 
consciousness xvi, 2 r 5 
Bewuf]theit 37 (11), 217 
Bewuf]tsein 37 (11), 217 
and the need to communicate 212-14 
the problem of 211- 14 
consensus, and morality 203 
consumerism xiv 
contemplative life 159, 184 
contemplative ones, delusion ofthe 75, 170-1 
(301) 
contempt xiii, xiv, 143, 243 
contradictions 169 (297), 233 
convictions 200- 1 
Corneille, Pierre 82 
corruption 
of the Christian Church 130, 222 
of the German language 96-7 
signs ofxii, 47-9 (23) 
counter-movements 131 
courtesy, beggars and 141 (204) 
courtly culture 
German reverence for 101-2 
of Voltaire 99 
courtly love, aristocratic tradition of x- xi 
creativity 
destructiveness ofix-x, xii, 69-70 (s8) 
life and 170, 171 
and taste 233-4 
creators 69-70 (s8) 
criticism, in favour of 174-5 (307) 

crowd 
with the 136 (170) 
in order to move the 147 (236) 
cruelty 47-8 
holY76 (73) 
where it is needed 151 (266) 
cults, orgiastic 8 5 
culture, higher, vs. barbarians 94-5, 100- 1 
curiosity 240, 24 7 
cynicism 232-3 (368) 
Damon84 
dancing 14, 16, 84, 103,246,248,259 
<langer 
different types in life 132-3 (154) 
the greatest 76-7 (76), 152 (271) 
Dante Alighieri 89, 92 
Darwin, Charles 218 
Darwinism 208,218 
deaf, better than deafened 185 (3J1) 
death 110, 132, 151,178,230 
<langer of 192 
growth after 91 (94) 
last words 54-5 (36), 92 
as purpose of existence 96 
the thought of 158 (278) 
and time 20 
Death of God xii-xiii, xvii, 109 (108), 119-20 
(125), 199-201 (343) 
debt, better in 149 (252) 
deception 133, 200-1 
of the conscience 240 
guarding against 143 (212) 
see also self-deception 
decision, a dangerous 123 (130) 
deep 133, 243, 245-6 
being and seeming 136 (173) 
defeat, fear of 134 
defences 139 (191), 243 
Delphi 85 
delusion, of the contemplative ones 170- 1 (301) 
democratic ages 215-16 
democratic idea 206-7 
<lemon 194 
Descartes, Rene 157n, 217 
description, or explanation xx-xxi, 113 
destruction, desire for ix-x, 70, 235 
determinism 1 1 3 
devotion 72-3 (65), 227-8 
diet xi, 128-9 
and pessimism 124 
digestion 135, 229, 246 
dignity, human114 
loss of 33-4 (6) 
Index 
diligence, moderation in 142 (210) 
Dionysian spirit 58, 234-5, 236 
diplomats 226 
disciples, undesired 53 (32) 
disciplinc 
of the head 76-7 
ofthe will 211 
dispensability 177 
dissatisfaction, different forms of 49-50 (24), 161, 
164 
distance 
action of women at a 71 ( 60) 
artistic 104, 169 
greatness from a 41 (15) 
viewing morality from a 244 - 5 
viewing oneself from a 79 
distress, knowledge of 60- 1 (48), 65 
distrustful, the, and style 145 (226) 
dog, my 177 (312) 
doing, we forgo by 173 (304) 
domestic animals, new 177 (314) 
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor (Mikhailovich) 205n 
doubt240 
Hume on sceptical xvii 
asasin 132 
ultimate 151 (265) 
drama, and music 232-3 
dramatic verse 80 
dreaming 63-4, 70, 132, 146 (232) 
drives 63, 114 
benevolence and 116 (118) 
goals of 225 
and knowledge 186 
ranking of 114-15 
drunkenness 69, 132-3 
duties, unconditional 32-3 (s) 
Echo 138 
Eckhart, Johannes (Meister Eckhart) 166 
education 44 
of man by his errors 114 
'educational establishment', on the 137 (177) 
egoism 40, 115, 128, 134 (162), 183 
and altruism 238 
in magnanimity and revenge 62 
egotism, stellar 1 6 
Egyptian youths 8 
Either/Or 204 
Eleatics 110, 111 
'elective affinity' 228 
Eliot, George xiii 
eloquence, on 137 (175) 
embarrassment, against 150 (254) 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 90 

Empedocles 84, 130 
and, knowing how to 160 (281) 
enemies 
open 135 (169) 
secret 142 
of the spirit 224 
English 95, 202, 208, 238 
enlightenment 47 
contribution of Christianity to 117 
on moral 137 (!78) 
envious one, the 142 (207) 
envy, without 19, 147 (238) 
E pictetus 117 
Epicureans 
and Stoics 174 (306) 
why we seem to be 240 (375) 
Epicurus 59 (45), 157,235 
epistemology 214 
equal rights, for men and women in love 227-8 
equality 
doctrine of human 42 
and health 117 
Eros 41 
errors 110, 112 
because ofthree 55 (37) 
consciousness and 37 
of desire for familiarity 21 5 
for four 114 (u5) 
in interpretation of natura! events 131 
necessity of 174-5 
as one of the conditions oflife 117 
and ultimate truth 151 
eruptions 36 (9) 
esprit, as un-Greek 82 (82) 
Eternal Recurrence xii, 161-2 (285), 194-5 
(341) 
thought experiment xv- xvii 
eternity xvi, 151 
et hos, not pat hos 178 
Europe 49, 137, 183, 199, 205, 206 
effects ofGermanic tastes on 124 
masculinization of 227 (J6z) 
narcotics of 129 
Southern 77-8 
transitional period 215-17 
Europeans 58, 87, 101,210,214,221,241,242 
good 242-3 
and savage tribes 129 
Evans, Mary Ann see Eliot, George 
evil 32, 43 (19), 54, 63, 98, 145 
and good 150 
imputed to nature 167 
evil hour, the 185 (332) 
excelsior 161-2 (285) 
Index 
excesses and vices 96 
existence 
ambiguous character of 238-9 
perspectival character of 238-40 
problem of the value of 218-30 
teachers of the purpose of 27-9 (1) 
the value of 5-6 
experience 
as interpreters of our 179-80 (JI9) 
experiments 62, 180, 181 
explanation 
or description 113 
mystical 121 (126) 
explosive ones, the 55 (38) 
facts, sense for xx, 9 5 
failures 172-3 
faith 
American 216 
errors of 1 1 o 
and hypothesis 123-4 
loss of 3-4 
makes blessed 143 (214) 
need for xiii, 205-6 
in oneself 161 (284) 
in science 200- 1 
woman's love as 228 
faithfulness 
and obstinacy 145 (229) 
in woman's love 228 
Fallersleben, Hoffmann von 22m 
falseness, with a good conscience 225-6 
farne 19, 136 (!71), 184-5 
familiarity, and knowledge 214- 15 
famous, comedy of the 52 (30) 
fanaticism 206, 211 
fate 157-8 (277), 236,249 
luck in 181 (323) 
fathers, and sons 144 
Faust 137 
fear 
in hatred 243-4 
and need for knowledge 214-15 
fearless ones, we 244 
feeling alone, fear of 115 
feigning oneself 73 (67) 
femininity 49 
festivals, the art of 89 
fictions xxi, 111 (uo), 117 (121) 
Fitzgerald, F(rancis) Scott 
The Great Gatsby xvii 
folk metaphysics 214 
foliowing, and leading 138 (181) 
folly 43 (20), 104-5, 143, 243-4 (379) 
265 

Fontenelle, Bernard le Bo vier, sieur de 31, 99 
Dialogues ofthe Dead 91 
foolishness, the dignity of 43 (20) 
fool's interlude 243-4 (379) 
footbridge, over the 41-2 (16) 
forbearance 144 (221) 
forces of energy 22 5 
forgetting xvii, 8, 12,232 
formerly, now and 89 (89) 
free spirits xi, 206, 260 
the good age for 138 (180) 
freedom 98, 167, 135 (275) 
freedom 
and infinity II9 
love of 94 
over things 104 
of perspective 244-5 
of the wilt 206, 244 
freethinkers xiii 
French 82, 205, 242 
French Revolution 82, 92, 100, 101, 208-9, 227 
friendship 14, 19, 41, 192-3, 229 
in honour of72 (61) 
star 1 59 (279) 
future 216, 246 
children of the 241 
the 'humanity' ofthe 190-1 (337) 
mirrored in fa ces 134 
musician of the 248 
thoughts and the 162 
'gai saber', translation of x- xi 
gaiety xiv, xxii, 248 
gait 160 (282) 
garrulousness, of writers 93 (97) 
Gast, Peter viii, 1 rn 
'gay', associations ofthe term x, 182-3 (327) 
'gay science' 28, 183 
'gaya scienza', translation ofx-xi, in, 241 
gender, and prejudice about love 227-8 (363) 
genealogical method ix, xviii 
generosity 141 (199) 
genius 95, 96, 226 
ofthe species 211-14 (354) 
Genoa 164-5 (291) 
German 
use of term 242 
what is? xi, 217-21 (357) 
German language 
corruption of the 96-7 
on the sound ofthe 101-3 (104) 
Germans 95, 137, 205, 207 
as artists 103 (105) 
and decline of Christianity 221 -3 
Index 
dissatisfaction with life 124 
as 'heathens' 129 
hopes 129 (I 46) 
language and character 102 
Germany 
Christian Church in 130 
'educational establishment' in 137 
ghosts 229 
goals 152 (267) 225 
God 18, 55, 70, 166, 209, 249, 252 
beliefbecome unbelievable xii-xiii, 199 (343) 
collapse offaith in 218-20, 221 
the conditions for 123 (129) 
insulting the dignity ofby sin 124-5 
and judgement 127 
madman seeking 119-20 
as oriental 125, 127 (141) 
prejudices of 150 
see also Death of God 
gods 84, 120, 172, 193 
the art of creating 127-8 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von I m, 90, 93, 100, 
101, 127n, 217, 235, 249 
Faust 137, 229, 249n 
Italian Journey xi 
poem to 249 
good 
and 'bad', origin of 148 (243) 
and the beautiful 86 (85) 
where it begins 63 (s3) 
good and evil 150 
perspective beyond 244-5 
good-natured, the 139-40 {192) 
goodness 14, 63 
Goths 129 
grace ofGod 124-5, 126 
'Graeculus' 216 
grammar 214 
gratitude 78-9 (78), 98-9 
gratitude, to art 104-5 (107) 
gravity 
defiance of spirit of xi, xiv, 19 
specific 244 
greatness 142 (208), 181 (325) 
at a distance 41 {15) 
Greece, ancient 82, 215-16 
greed 
for knowledge 148, 149 
and love 39-41 
Greek 129 
Greeks 8-9, 193-4, 234 
dignity of sacrilege 125 
feeling for nature 133 
ideal of the passions 126 
266 

Index 
as logical 82 
love of good speech 79-80 
new religions 130 
superficiality of xxii, 8-9 
taste81-2(8I) 
without feelings of sin 124 
guilt 149 (250) 
habits 51, 148 (247), 167-8 (295), 175 
Hafis (or Hafiz) (Shams-ed-Din Mohammad) 
235 
Hamlet 94, 135 
happiest, the <langer ofthe 171-2 (302) 
happiness 11, 65, 71, 147, 150, 158, 161, 195 
art and 86, 88 
divine ofhumanity 190-1 
Homeric 171-2 
the road to 143 (213) 
and suffering 59, 192 
and thinking 183 
ofthose who renounce something 134 (165) 
and virtue 143 
happy ones, two 172-3 (303) 
Hardenberg, Friedrich Leopold von 
see Novalis 
harming, with what is best in oneself 51 (28) 
Hartmann, Eduard von 220 
hatred 243-4 
health 
defining 11 6- 1 7 
the great 246-7 (382) 
and philosophy 4-7 
will to 117 
hearing, limits of our sense of 140 (196) 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich xiv-xv, 96, 218, 
219 
Helvetius, Claude-Adrien 91 
Heraclitus of Ephesus 90n 
herd instinct 62, 114-15 (II6), 140,210 
and conscience 115, 131 
and consciousness 213-14 
and harm to egoism 183 
and opinions 136 (170) 
and reputation 168 
heresy, and witchcraft 54 (35) 
hermit 229 (364), 229-30 (365), 248 
heroism 153 (268), 160, 166, 186 
hexameter 8 5 
hic niger est 141 (203) 
high spirits 162-3 (288) 
Hinduism 122 
history xxii, I 20, 2 I g 
of every day 17 5 (308) 
hidden (historia abscondita) 53-4 (34) 
asensefor 83, 190 
homage, learning how to pay 98-9 (rno) 
home, always at 149 (253) 
homeless, we who are 241-3 (377) 
Homer 37, 86, 172, 235 
homines religiosi 208-9 (350), 223 
homo poeta 132 (153) 
honesty xvii, xviii, 98, 104, II I, 114, 179 (JI9), 
184, 189, 200-1 (344), 232-3 
hope 152 
Horace 82-3, 132 
horrors xiv- xv 
human, what is most to you? 153 (274) 
human beings 
distinguished from animals 171 
preparatory 160-1 (283) 
prophetic 178 (JI6) 
humanitarianism xiii 
humanities x 
humanity 77, 114, 242 
ancient, colour of 132 
dangers of monotheism for 128 
of the future 190- 1 (337) 
naturalization of 110 
no sin against 125 
Hume, David xvii, 218,234 
humility, stupid 50 
humour 82 
hunting 52 
h ypocrisy 98 
hypothesis 200 
and faith 123-4 
ideal, and material 143 (215) 
idealism 237-8 (372), 240 
ideals 
creating one's own 127-8 
'inland sea' (Mittelmeer) of 246-7 
ideas 206-7, 214-15, 237 
idleness, and leisure 183-4 (329) 
illness, xxiii, xxiv, 4-7, 12, 117, 135 
illusions x, xii, xix, Bo, 95 
imitators 150 (255) 
immortality 151 
imperfection, the attraction of79 (79) 
improvisation 46, 168, 172 
in media vita 181 (324) 
incense 127 (142) 
incipit 
parodia 4 
tragoedia, 4, 195 (342) 
incomprehensibility 236 (371), 245-6 
lndians, diet 124, 129 
individuality, as a punishment 115 

individuals 
always in our own company 135 
and communities, the herd instinct II4-15 
denial of 95 
enforcement of their taste 56 
rights of in polytheism 128 
tyrants as instances of 48 
individuation, the principle of 96 
industriousness 34-5 (7), 44 
inference II 2 
backward 235 
bad 145 (227) 
infinite 
in the horizon ofthe II9 (,24) 
our new 239-40 (374) 
influential, the most 133 (,56), 180 
'inland sea' (Mittelmeer) 246 
instrument-nature 168 
intellect 182-3 
and experience of pleasure, pain and will 122 
perspectives of 239-40 
see also conscience, intellectual 
intellectual security xx, 76-7 (76) 
interpretation ix, xxi- xxii, 1 5 
and belief in opposite values xiv- xv 
of existence 238-40 
function of religions 211 
ofour experience 179-80 (JI9) 
possibility of infinite 239-40 
unconscious 122 
interruption 162 (286) 
intuition 95 
Islam 122 
Italian opera 77-8, 80-1, roo 
Italy xi, 160 (28,), 164-5 (29,) 
Januarius, St 155n 
Jehovah 126 
Jewishness 127 (,40) 
Jewishness, and sin 124-5 
Jews 97, 126, 207, 220 
as actors 226 
as the chosen people 125-6 (,36) 
joy xii, 13, II6, 132, 184, 260 
after illness 7 
capacity for 38 
and contempt 243 
sharing 192-3 
in unreason 77 
joyless one, the 147 (239) 
Judaism, and possibility af Jesus Christ 126 
Judaization of the world 124 
judgement, and conscience 187 
justice II4, II5, 138 (184), 148, 152, 163 
Index 
Kant, Immanuel 93, 140, 188,218,234 
Kant's joke 140 (,93) 
knowing 
how to end 160 (28,) 
what it means 185-6 (333) 
knowledge 
assimilating and making it instinctive 37 
and life rr1-12, 181 
love of 118 
more than a means rr8-19 (,23) 
not predestined for 50 (25) 
origin of 1 ro- 12 (, IO) 
the origin of our concept of 214-15 (355) 
search for 160-1, 168-9, 181,209,240, 244-5 
the sigh ofthe one who comes to 149 (249) 
the value of 137 
La Rochefoucauld, Fran~ois, duc de viii, 118 
lack, what we 133 (,55) 
Lamarck, Jean Baptiste (Pierre Antoine) de 
Monet, Chevalier de 95 
Landor, Walter Savage 
Jmaginary Cnnversations 90 
language, development of, and development of 
consciousness 213 
last hour, on the 178 (JI5) 
'last man' xiv, xvi, xvii 
last words 54-5 (36), 92 
of Socrates 194 
laughable 140 (,95) 
laughter 27-9, 92, 137, 141 (200), 181,247 
law of agreement xx, 77 (76) 
laws, what they betray 58 (43) 
laziness 136,211 
leading, and foliowing 136, 138 (,8,) 
learning 
losing oneself in 174 
to love 186-7 (334) 
lecture-room, outside the 53 (33) 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm xiv, 212,217,218 
leisure, and idleness rr8, 183-4 (329) 
Leo X, Pope 118- 19 
Leopardi, Giacomo 90, 92 
Lesage, Alain-Rene 78n 
letter-writing 184 
liar, and poet 144 (222) 
liberal 241 
liberalism xiii 
life 181 (324) 
268 
and art 170 
author of one's 170, 171 
beliefs necessary for xviii - xix, II 7 ( I2 I) 
different types of <langer in 132-3 (,54) 
faith in 28 

inescapability of 6-7 
and knowledge 111 - 12, 181 
living itto the full 173 
love ofxiv, xv, 7, 157-8 
the music of 237 
not as argument 117 (121) 
as a problem 7 
talk of enduring 182 
what is? 50 (26) 
as a woman 193 (339) 
light 13, 167 
refracted 176-7 (JI1) 
lights, and shadows 89 (90) 
living dangerously 161 
living well 181 
logic 82, 207, 218 
the origin of 112-13 (II 1) 
loneliness 230 
Louis XIV 60, 125, 139 
love 
amour-plaisir or amour-van it i of knowledge 
u8 
artists in 69, 70- 1 
and the critique of Christianity 127 
and feigning oneself 73 
Index 
malice 48 
man 
the bound 17 
concept oflove 227-8 
and female 15 
like animals 145 
modern-day 247 
as world-negating 204 
man ofletters 2 3 1 
marriage 7 5, 229 
Martial (Marcus Valerius Martialis) 82 
martyrdom 123, 155n 
Marx, Karl xiii 
masculinity of science 166-7 
masculinization, of Europe 227 (362) 
masks 78, 229 
masses 
progress of the 128 
and slavery 131 
mastery, the price of 230- 1 
material, and ideal 143 (215) 
mathematical representation, as idealization xxi, 
110-11 (no), 117 (121) 
mathematics 148 (246) 
how each sex has its own prejudice about 227-8 
Mazzini, Giuseppe 33 
meaninglessness xv, 239 
(363) 
in Jesus Christ 126 
and Just 72 (62) 
and misanthropy 135 (167) 
motherly 75-6 
one must learn to 186-7 (334) 
pitfalls of 253-4 
sexual 40 
and strength of personality 202 
the things people call 39-41 (14) 
tradition of courtly x-xi 
and vanity 151 
what in others do you? 152 (272) 
ofwomen 226 
!overs, of the age 134 ( 161) 
luck, in fate 181 (323) 
lunatic see madman 
Just 72 (62) 
Luther, Martin 93, 123, 129, 130, 222-3 
luxury ofsentiment 52-3 
Machiavellianism 217 
madman, the xii, 77, 119-20 (125), 132 
magic 
oflive 193 
and will 121 
magnanimity ix, 61-2 (49), 161 
'Mainlander' (Phillip Batz) 220 
mechanics 121,239 
mediators, against 145 (228) 
Medici, Giovanni de' see Beroaldus 
mediocrity 241 
meeting again 180 (320) 
melody 81, 85, 101, 146 
men, and women 73, 74-5, 116 
mentiri 133 (157) 
Mephistopheles 137, 229 
Merimee, Prosper 90 
metaphysical faith xviii, 200- 1 
metaphysics 
and illusion x, xiii 
need for 5-6, 131,205 
rejection ofxiv-xv, xxi 
and the value of existence 5-6 
middle class, intellectual 238 
middle ground, the 15-16 
mind, pathological states and pride 5 
Mirabeau, Honore Gabriel Riqueti, comte de 92 
misanthropy 243 
and love 135 (167) 
misery, and happiness 192 
misfortune 19 I - 2 
mistrust, and philosophy 204 
mockery 1, 244 
modem state xi, 118, 241-3 (377) 
modesty 210, 231 

Index 
monogamy 227 
monotheism, as a <langer to humanity 128 
Montaigne, Michel (Eyquem) de 46, 93, 102 
Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondat, baron 
de la Brede et de 99 
Montinari, Mazzino xxvii 
moral, the scope of the 114 (II 4) 
moral judgements 187-9 
moral sentiments, origin of ix 
moralities, the age of 28 
morality 165-6 
and Christianity xiii-xiv, 219-20 
consequences ofDeath of God for European xii, 
199-201 
of custom 51, 58, 59-60, 98, 128, 168 
the disguise of 210 
European 244 
the extent to which it is hardly dispensable 210 
(352) 
and the herd instinct 114-15 (II6) 
historians of 202-3 
the knot of 132 
medical formulation of 116 
motives vs. principle 45 
personal 192 
as a problem 202-3 (345) 
and religion 51, 199 
ofrenunciation 173 
and science 201 
and truthfulness xix, 199-201 
ulterior motives of223-5 (359) 
value of 203 
vs. art 104-5 
and the will of revenge 224 
morals, to the preachers of 165-6 (292) 
Moravian Brotherhood 211 
Moses 50 
mothers 75-6 (72) 
and daughters 144 
male 76 
motives, the supposed 58-9 (44) 
Murat, Joachim 135 
music 186, 248 
as advocate 103-4 (106) 
ofthe best future 138 (183) 
German 78, 100-1 (103), 234 
oflife 237 
power of84 
Wagner's 232-3 
the woman in 72 (63) 
musicians 87-8, 146 (234) 
mystical explanations 121 (126) 
nakedness 2 1 o 
names ix-x, 69-70 
as terms of abuse 1 29 
and visibility 151 
Napoleon Bonaparte 48-9, 135, 160, 227 
narcotics 58, 87 
and diet 128-9 
European 129 
nationalism 227, 242 
natura!, the 145 (225) 
natura! history 212 
natura! sciences 208,218,238 
naturalism, French 205 
naturalization of humanity 11 o 
nature 8, 219 
against the slanderers of 167 (294) 
art and 79-81 (Bo) 
greatness in compared with human beings 133 
laws in 110 
and the painter 22 
stylization of 164 
value-less 171 
and woman 70 
nature's stinginess 189-90 (336) 
Naturwissenschaft x 
'nausea' xvi, 4, 179 
Nebenmenschen 128 
necessity II 6 
need 
cause and effect 142 (205) 
for familiarity ofknowledge 214-15 
for interpretation of the world 204 
law of 56 
for metaphysics 5-6, 131,205 
to believed xiii, 205-6 (347), 209 
to communicate and strength of consciousness 
212-14 
for truth I I I 
women 's for children 7 5 
needful, one thing is 163-4 (290) 
neediness 64 
negation 173, 175 
Nero, Emperor 54 
New Year's Day xiv, 157 (276) 
Newton, Isaac 55, 245 
Nietzsche, Elisabeth (his sister) xvi, xxiii 
Nietzsche, Friedrich 
biographical details viii, xi, xxiii- xxv 
death viii, xxv 
ill health viii, xxiii, xxiv, 3-4 
insanity viii, xxv 
WORKS 
Anti-Christ, The xvii, xx, xxv 
Beyond Good and Evi! vii, x, xiii, xiv, xvii, xix, 
xxiv 

Birth ofTragedy, The viii, xv, xxiii 
Case of Wagner, The xxv 
Daybreak viii, xi, xxiv 
'Declaration ofLove' 253-4 
Dionysian Dithyrambs xxv 
'Ecce Homo' (Poem) 23 
Ecce Homo xiv, 1n, xxv 
'Fool in Despair' 255 
Cay Science, The, history of publication vii, 
xxiv 
Genealogy of Morality, On the vii, ix-x, xiii, 
xvm, xx, xx1v 
'Happiness, My' 257 
Human, All Too Human viii, xi, xix, xxiv 
Hymn to Life xxiv 
Idylls of Messina xxiv 
'Joke, Cunning and Revenge' 11-23 
'Mistral, To the' 258-60 
'Mysterious Bark, The' 253 
Nachlass xvi, xix, xxi 
Nietzsche contra Wagner xxii, xxv 
0n the Genealogy of Morality vii, ix-x, xiii, 
xvm, xx, xxiv 
'Pious Beppa' 252-3 
'Poets Calling'250-1 
'Richard Wagner in Bayreuth' xxiv, 98 
'Sils-Maria' 258 
'Sangs of Prince Vogelfrei' 249-60 
'South, In the' 251-2 
'Theocritical Goathherd, Song of a' 254-5 
Thus Spoke Zarathustra vii, xvi, xxiv 
'Towards New Seas' 258 
Twilight ofthe Idols, The xiii, xvi, xxv 
Untimely Meditations vii, xxiv, 98n 
'Vacillating People, These' 255 
'Wanderer and his Shadow, The' viii, xxiv 
Will to Power, The xvi, xix, xxi 
Nietzsche,Joseph (his brother) xxiii 
nihilism xii, xix, 204 
European xiii- xiv 
Petersburg-style 205 
nobility xii, 184, 190 
Chamfort's hatred of 91-2 
envy of rno 
and power ofthe court ofLouis XIV 125 
trade and 52-3 (31) 
noble, and common 30-2 (3) 
noble style, and the lack of 56-7 (40) 
noblemindedness, the ultimate 64 (ss) 
noise71, 141 
norms, plurality of 128 
North, the 130, 165,208,222, 223 
Novalis 8n 
novel, Spanish adventure 77-8 
Index 
observation 187 
obstinacy, and faithfulness 145 (229) 
one times one 1 50 (260) 
'open sea' xii, 199, 258 
'openhearted' one, the 140 (194) 
opera, Italian 77-8, 80-1, 100 
opinions 189 
about morality 203 
public 136 
and taste 55-6 
oracles 85 
orators 212 
ordre du jour pour le roi, I' 45-6 (22) 
Orient 208 
oriental, God as 125, 127 (141) 
originality 151 (261) 
Orpheus 88, 162 
Orphism 130 
paganism, with a good conscience 217 
pain 
asks for the cause 38 
called dog 177 
as the great suspicion 6-7 
infliction of 179, 181 
as liberator of the spirit 6-7 
palliatives against 182 
or pleasure 122 
and preservation of the species 179 
the soul and 88 
ofthe soul and ofthe body 61 
soul-doctors and 181-2 (326) 
twofold 14 
the tyranny of 4 
wisdom in 179 (p8) 
painter, and nature 22 
parable 180 (322) 
parable, speaking in a 126 (137) 
paradise, from 150 (259) 
parliamentarianism 136 (174) 
parody 4, 247 
passion 
for knowledge 118, 209- 10 
on stage 79-80 
of a woman 228 
passions 32, rn3 
ancient 132 
the colour ofthe 126 (139) 
on the suppression of the 60 (47) 
patience 229 
patriotism 205 
Paul, St 126,211 
penal codes 58 
people, the 208-10, 214 

Index 
perfection, music and 232 
Pericles 21 6 
perspective xxi-xxii, 169-70 (299), 239-40 (374) 
of art 78-9 
dangerous 146 
and egoism 134 ( 162) 
perspectivism 213 
pessimism xv, 61, 204-5 (346) 
ofthe future 236 
medication for 15 
nineteenth-century 234 
romantic 236 
Schopenhauer's 218-21 
pessimists, as victims 124 ( 134) 
phenomenalism 213 
Philetas 83 
philistinism xiv 
philologists, a word to the 99-100 (rn2) 
philology viii, xx, xxiii, 222 
philosophers 
compared with scholars 246 
the evil hour 185 
German 217 
hiding place of wisdom 224-5 
not idealists 237-8 
passion of the knowledge-seeker 209, 210 
as schematizers 207 
and security ofthe 'idea' 214-15 
philosophy 
ancient 132, 183 
of artists 97 
comforts of 163 
German spirit in xi, 217 
and health 4-7 
and mistrust 204 
poetry and 86 
physicians 6, 169 
physics, lang live! 187-9 (335) 
physiology 212 
pictures 11 3 - 14 
piety 18, 21, 122,209,219, 252-3 
Pindar 152n 
pious, we too are still 200- 1 (344) 
Plato 42, 89, 130,201,210,217 
idealism 237-8 
pleasure 37-8 
or pain 122 
in work 57 
poetry 250-1 
origin of83-6 (84) 
and philosophy 86 
and prose 90 (92) 
poets 22, 132 (153) 250-1 
consolation for sick 256 
imperfection of 79 
and liars 144 (222) 
making fun of 4 
of ourlives 170, 171 
Roman 83 
as servants of morality 28 
in Shakespeare 94 
point ofview, the most dangerous 146 (233) 
poisons, on the doctrine of 113-14 (n3) 
polite one, the 147 (237) 
politicians 52 
politics xi-xii, 53 
German 221, 242 
polytheism, the greatest advantage of 127-8 
(143) 
polytropoi 201 
Pompeii 78 
poor, the 138 (185), 142 
Portofino 160 
Poseidon 7m 
possession 140, 165 
and love 40-1, 140,228 
posthumous ones 229-30 
poverty, tinding a motive for one's 42 (17) 
power 
on the doctrine of the feeling of 38-9 (13) 
and interpretation ix- x 
lust for 111 
praise 
against those who 139 (190) 
by choice 148 (245) 
prayer 122-3 (128), 161, 231 
preachers, of morals, to the 165-6 (292), 181-2 
(326) 
predestination 181 
pregnancy, spiritual 7 5 
prejudice, 'science' as 238-9 (373) 
preparatory human beings 160- 1 (283) 
presentation, what is offensive in the 139 (187) 
preservation ofthe human race 27-9 (1), 32 (4), 
179 
pretence 225-6 
pride 4, 22, 72, 141 (1g8), 240 
ancient 42-3 (18) 
priestly type, in honour of the 209-10(351) 
priests, and the Reformation 222-3 
princes 137 
principle 123-4 (133) 
probity 231 
professions 215 
profit 184 
Prometheus 125, 149, 170 
Propertius, Sextus 83 
property, and love 40 
272 

prophecy 85, 132 
prophetic human beings 178 (JI6) 
prose, and poetry 90 (92) 
Protestantism 123,207,208 
proud one, chagrin ofthe 141 (198) 
proverbs 250 
providence, personal 157-8 (277) 
Prussian officer 1 02 
psychologists, English xx 
punishment, the purpose of 144 (219) 
purpose, the concept of 22 5 
Ptitz, Peter xxvii 
Pythagoras 130, 2 IO 
Pythagoreans 84 
question, the final xxii, 248 
question mark, our 203-4 (346), 247 
questioning 7, 30, 202-3 
questions and answers 57, 129 (147), 140 
Racine, Jean rn2 
lphigenia 81 
Ram 122 
rank-ordering 114- 15, 238 
Raphael 177 
readers, address to 2 1 
reading, in the right way xx, 247-8 
realism ix, 69 (5-7) 
reality 60, 70 
alternative perspectives on the same xxi- xxii, 
169-70 (299) 
falsification by using concepts xx- xxi, 113 
Realpolitik 217 
reason 29, 112-13, 179-80, 238,251 
reasons, a way of asking for 142 (209) 
recitativo secco 81 
Recurrence, Eternal see Eternal Recurrence 
reductionism ix 
Ree, Paul xxiv, 202n 
refinement 19, 57, 64, 171-2 
reflection 159, 183 
Reformation 54, 130, 222-3 
reformations 
thefailureof130-1 (149) 
where they arise 130 (148) 
relativism, moral 20, 203 
religion 
as exercise and prelude 170 
German spirit in xi 
and honesty 179 
and morality 199 
on the origin of 131 (151) 
perspective of 79 
reasons and intents behind habits of 51 
Index 
religions 
the age of 28 
on the origin of 2rn-11 (353) 
world 206 
religiosity 208-9 (350 ), 223 
aftereffects of the oldest 121-2 (127) 
religious wars 128 (144) 
remorse, against 57 (41) 
Renaissance 227 
renunciation 50- 1 (27), 162, 173, 228 
repentance 124 
reputation 52, 63 (5-2), 69-70 
a firm 168-9 (296) 
resistance 133 
rest, the seekers of 134 (164) 
retroactive force 53-4 
retrospection 178-9 (317) 
revenge ix, 62 (49), 74 (69), 224 
rhyme 250-1 
as remedy 256 
rhythm 84-6 
rich, the 141, 150 
rightness, judgements of 187-8 
rights, equal for men and women in love 227-8 
Rimus remedium 2 56 
Ritschl, Friedrich xxiii 
roles, faith in 215-16 
Roman Catholic Church 208 
Roman Empire 83 
rhetoric of xii 
Roman Republic xii 
Romans, ancient 58,133,216,221,222 
romanticism 4, 49 
overcoming 244-5 
what is? 234-6 (370) 
Rome, ancient 82, 83, 124n, 211 
Rossini, Gioachino 77, 81 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 89 
Rubens (Peter Paul) 235 
sacrifices 39, 44-5, 64, 144 (220), 209 
sage, the 111, 209, 224 
Saint-Simon, Claude-Henri 242 
saints 224 
disguised 1 7 
towards a critique of 131 (150) 
Sais 8n, 69 
sameness xxi, II2, 189 
savage tribes, and Europeans 129 
scepticism xvii, 23, 62, 111, 161 (284), 222 
deconstructive xx 
moral in Christianity 117-18 (122) 
ofwomen 75 
sceptics 72 (64) 
273 

Schiller, Friedrich 8n 
Ode to Joy xxii 
scholars 
books of 230- r 
degeneration of the modem 223 
Jewish 207 
middle class 238 
on the origin of 206-7 (348), 207-8 (349) 
philosophers compared with 246 
Schopenhauer, Arthur xv, 77n, 93, 121-2, 218, 
219-21, 234, 236 
on the Germans 129 
his followers 94-8 (99) 
on religion 131 
science 35, 104, 138 
on the aim of 37-8 (12) 
as an attempt to humanize things r r 3 
associations of the term x 
and certainty 59-60 
as a condition and ethos I18-19 
and consequences of Death of God 200- r 
development in 218 
and distrust 53 
and errors 55 
masculinity of 166-7 
'modem' and degeneration ofthe scholar 223 
and morality 201 
as prejudice 238-9 (373) 
preludes to r 70 (Joa) 
severity ofr 66 
secrecy 140, 176, 241 
sects 130 
seduction, involuntary 14 
self 
sense of II5 
truth to 12 
self-control 173-4 (305) 
self-deception xvii-xviii, 111, 200-1 (344), 225 
self-denial r 73 
self-dissatisfaction 16i, 164 
self-hypnosis 229 
self-interest ix 
self-knowledge 187, 189, 213 
self-mockery r, 244 
self-preservation 207-8 
self-questioning 5 
self-sacrifice 44-5 
selfishness 44, 64 
harm to 183 
the innocence of the utmost 96, 97 
and moral judgements 188-9 
selflessness 
and morality 202, 203 
to the teachers of 43-5 (21) 
Index 
Seneca 17, II7 
sensations, thoughts as shadows of 137 (179) 
sense for facts xx, 9 5 
sense of truth 62 (s I) 
senses, vicariousness ofthe 144 (223) 
sensitivity 174 
sensualists 234, 237-8 
Septuagint 129 
seriously, taking 182-3 (327) 
seriousness 
about truth 88-9 (88) 
the great xxii, 24 7 
sex xi, 40, 227-8 
priests and 222 
the third 76 (7 5) 
shadows, lights and 89 (90) 
Shakespeare, William, in praise of 93-4 (98) 
shame 78, r 52, r 53 
ships II9, 159, 225, 258 
get on the 163 (289) 
sick man, about a 135 (168) 
Sieyes, Emmanuel Joseph, comte de 92 
sigh I 69 (298) 
signs 213-14 
silence 71, 75 
lack of 146 (230) 
residue of 80 
ofSocrates 193-4 
similarity, as identity Ir 2 
sin 252 
and Christ's error 126 
origin of 124-5 (135) 
Sittlichkeit der Sitte see morality, of custom 
skeleton keys 21 
slavery 56-7, 131 
new 241 
slow periods, our 240- 1 (376) 
sociability 82, r 84 
social order, ecclesiastical and civil 223 
socialism xiii, 49, 56-7, 217 
Socrates 53, 54, 183, 238 
the dying 193-4 (340) 
soldiers, and leaders vs. workers and employers 
56-7 
solemnity, rejection ofxiv, xxii, 182-3 (327), 247 
solitude 17, 62 (so), 138 (183) 
from the seventh 17 5 (309) 
thinking in 251 
songs 4, 85, 248, 251 
of medieval troubadours x- xi 
Sophocles 41, 80, 82 
soul 
274 
distress of the 60, 61 
health ofthe I16-17 (120) 

independence ofthe 93-4 
and pain 88 
and spirit 6 
warlike 53 
soul-doctors, and pain 181-2 (326) 
souls, narrow 14 
South, the 77-8, 208, 221-2, 237 
barbarization of old culture 130 
speakers, two 92-3 (96) 
specialists 230- 1 
species 
on the genius ofthe 211-14 (354) 
preservation ofthe 27-9 (1), 32 (4), 179 
speech 
Greek love of good 79-80 
rhythm in 84-6 
Spencer, Herbert 238 
Spinoza, Baruch 55, 96, 185, 186, 208, 237 
spirit 
of the artist 88 
and character 146 (235) 
daredevils of the 9 
of gaiety xxii 
liberated 169 
the peasant rebellion ofthe 221-3 (358) 
plebeianism of the 223 
politics as prostitution of the 53 
revenge against the, as ulterior motive of 
morality 223-5 (359) 
ofsoul 6 
that plays naively 247 
see also free spirits; high spirits 
spirituality 223, 244 
squanderer, a 141 (202), 212 
stars 23, rn9, 260 
state, and church 223 
Stendhal 92 
Stoicism 98, 182, 224 
Stoics 38, II7 
and Epicureans 174 (Jo6) 
storm 178, 179 
stupidity 204, 214, 233 
virtuous 77 
style 163-4 
and the distrustful 145 (226) 
sub specie aeterni 151 (262) 
sublimity 177 
success and failure, as answers to questions 57 
successes 1 72- 3 
suffer, the will to, and those who feel compassion 
191-2 (338) 
sufferers, misunderstood 149 (251) 
suffering 141 
the desire for 64-5 (s6) 
Index 
from impoverishment oflife 234 
from a superabundance oflife 234 
and happiness 59 
the need for xiv 
prophecy and 178 
suicide 
of the ascetic 123 
Christianity and 123 (131) 
sun 13, 16, 180, 195 
superstition 
as progress against faith 47 
rhythm and 84-6 
surface see skinnedness 
suum cuique 148 (242) 
Tacitus 185 
Tartars 129 
Tasso, Torquato 17 5n 
taste 174 
against Christianity 123 
bad and good 7 8 
changed 55-6 (39) 
and creative power 233-4 
good 238-9 
Greek 81-2 (81) 
the spoiler of 136 (172) 
temperament 39 
Teplitz 100 
Terpander 84 
theatre 74, 86-7 (86), 232-3 
themes xii- xiii 
Theocritus 83, 254n 
thinkers II2, 139, (189), 180 
and applause 184-5 
gloominess of the great 63 
sick 4-5 
thinking 34 
conscious 186, 213-14 
deep 133 
and happiness 183 
outdoors 230 
and seriousness 182-3 
with a warlike soul 53 
'thorough', the 146 (2JI) 
'Thou Shalt' 203, 206 
thoughts 
and the future 162 
and need xiii 
as shadows of sensations 137 (179) 
unconscious 186 
and words 148 (244), 169 
Tiberius, Emperor 54 
Tibetans 122 
time, and death 20 
275 

Timon of Athens 243 
toad 15 
today, living for 48 
torment, no image of 177 (313) 
trade, and nobility 52-3 (JI) 
tragedy xxii, 4, 47, 87, 132 
the age of 28 
begins 195 (342), 247 
Greek So 
Greek invention of 125 
trait, an uncomfortable 133 (158) 
translations 82-4 (83) 
troubadours x-xi, rn, 259 
trust 21, 200- 1 
truth 150 
being serious about 88-9 (88) 
destructiveness of xix 
experience in antiquity 132 
explorers of 77 
incorporation ofxx, 112 (IIo) 
is it necessary for science 200- 1 
Nietzsche's understanding ofxix-xxi 
the sense of 62 (s I) 
surprising 245 
to oneself 98 
as the weakest form ofknowledge I I0-11 
woman as 252 
see also will to truth 
truthfulness xvii-xxi, 219 
belief in xiii 
and Christian morality 219-20 
making it bearable xx 
Turenne, Henri de la Tour d' Auvergne, vicomte 
de 197 
Turgenev, Ivan (Sergeyevich) 205n 
tyrants 48-9, 56 
Ubermenschen, creating 128 
Uhland, Ludwig 248n 
Ulfilas 129 
understandable, on the question ofbeing 245-6 
(381) 
understanding 151, 185-6 
unknown, the (das Unbekannte) 240 
unnaturalness, in art So- 1 
unreason 76-7, 119-20 
unsuccessful, the 76 (74) 
Untermenschen 128 
urbanization 160- 1 
utilitarianism xiii 83-4 
Utility 45, III, 201,214 
values 171 
aesthetic 235-6 
Index 
belief in opposition of xiv- xv 
devaluation 165-6 
and nihilism xiii-xiv 
vanity 22, 204, 225 
of artists 87-8 (87) 
without 151 (263) 
vegetarians, <langer for 128-9 (145) 
vicariousness, ofthe senses 144 (223) 
victory, after a great 1 34 ( 16 3) 
violence 48, 61 
virginity 220 
virtue 
and happiness 143 
sentiments of 245-6 
virtues ix, 12, r 5 1 
annihilation of faith in ancient, by Christianity 
117 
Christian 1 3 I 
dealing with 134 (160) 
harmful to their possessors 43-5 
has each its age 133 (159) 
unconscious 35 (8) 
Vishnu 122 
vitafemina 193 (339) 
vocations 22 5 
Vogelfrei 249n 
voice 
alto74 
<langer in the 143 (216) 
Voltaire 55, 91, 95, 97, 99 (101) 
vulgarity ix, 30- 1 (J), 77-8, So 
Wagner, Richard xv, xxiii, 81, 96-8, 232-3, 234, 
236, 248n 
Wahanabis 58 
wanderer 16, 244-5 (380) 
war 19, 47, 90, 184 
classic age of 227 
and detour to suicide 192 
wars, religions 128 (144) 
wave, will and 176 (Jio) 
way of life, religions 2!0- II 
weakness 205, 242 
the strength of 73 (66) 
weight, the heaviest 152, 194-5 (341), 244 
will 
discipline of the 2II 
the feeling of and cause and effect 121 
Schopenhauer's concept ofthe 95-6, 121-2 
sickening of the 206 
to immortalize 2 3 5-6 
unfree 244 
and wave 176 (Jio) 
and willingness 73-4 (68) 

will to power, which is will to life 208 
will to suffer, and those who feel compassion 
191-2 (338) 
will to truth, unconditional xvii-xix, 8, 200-1 
(344) 
willingness, the way of women is 73 
wisdom 20, 104 
claim to 224- 5 
and folly 143 
in pain 179 (JI8) 
for the people 209 
practical, and art 114 
secret 241 
worldly 12 
Wissenschaft x-xi 
witchcraft 149 
and heresy 54 (Js) 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig ix 
woman 
concept oflove 227-8 
life as 193 (339) 
and loss ofmind 21 
love for one who gives us doubts 7 
in music 72 (63) 
spoiled by Christianity 227 
women xi, 15, 202, 2 52 
as actresses 226 
artists in love with 70 
and bad inference 145 (227) 
capacity forrevenge 74 
corrupted by men 73 
as function of men u6 
honour of75 
and marriage 7 5 
mastery of74 (70) 
noble in devotion 72-3 
old 72 
Index 
and priests 222 
small 76 
the strength of their weakness 73 
and their action at a distance 71 (60) 
under the influence of wine 58 
unsuccessful, who talk too much 76 
upper-class, and chastity 74-5 (71) 
words, thoughts and 148 (244), 169,213 
work 139 (188), 224 
and artist 147 (241) 
and boredorn 57-8 (42) 
and good conscience 184 
passion for 34-5 
workers 139 
and employers, vs. soldiers and leaders 56-7 
world 
Christian decision to find it ugly and bad 123 
existence of the xv, 204 (346) 
human beings as creators of their 170- 1 
'in itself' xxi, 214 
as a machine !09 
'saying Yes to the' xvi, 157,243 
'scientific' interpretation of the 238-9 
views of the !09- IO 
vs. nothing xxi 
writers, on the garrulousness of 93 (97) 
writing 
with one's foot 21 
reasons for 90- 1 (93) 
scribbling drive! 22 
youth 14, 18, 55 
European 64 
Zarathustra 195, 246, 258 
Zeus 149 

ISBN 978-0-521-63645-2 
11 11 
780521 636452 > 

